MARTIN HEIDEGGER

BEING AND TIME

Translated by
John Macquarrie & Edward Robinson

1]
BLACI<WELL
D./o,d UK C...brii,. USA
~

This translation copyright © Blackwell Publishers Ltd 1962

First English edition 1962
Reprinted 1967, 1973, 1978, 1980, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1988,
1990,1992,1993,1995 (twice), 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999,2000 (twice), 2001

Blackwell Pub1ishers Ud
108 Cowley Road
Oxford OX4 IJF, UK

Dedicated to

EDMUND HUSSERL
in friendship and admiration
Todtnauberg in Boden, Black Forest
8 April 1926

Translated from the German
Sein und Zeit (seventh edition)
by permission of
Max Niemeyer Verlag, Tübingen

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A CIP catalogue record for this book
is available from the British Library

0-631-1977D-2(pbk)

Printed and bound in Great Britain
by MPG Books Ud, Bodmin, Cornwall

This book is printed on acid-free paper.

CONTENTS
[Page riferences marked •H' indicate the pagination of ihe later German editions, as shawn in the
outer margins ofthe text.]

Translators' Preface
Author's Preface to the Seventh German Edition
Introduction
Exposition of the Question of the Meaning of Being
1. THE

NECESSITY,

STRUCTURE, AND

PRIORITY

OF

H.2

21

H.2

21

THE

QUESTION OF BEING

The necessity for explicitly restating the question of
Being
H.2
2. The formaI structure of the question of Being
H·5
3. The ontological priority of the question of Being
H.8
H. II
4. The ontical priority of the question of Being
I.

II. THE TWOFOLD TASK IN WORKING OUT THE QUESTION
OF BEING. METHOD AND DESIGN OF OUR INVESTIGATION

5. The ontological analytic of Dasein as laying bare
the horizon for an Interpretation of the meaning of
Being in general
6. The task of Destroying the history of ontology
7. The phenomenological method of investigation
A. The concept ofphenomenon
B. The concept of the logos
c. The preliminary conception ofphenomenology
8. Design of the treatise

H. 15

H. 15
H. 19

H. 17
H. 27

H·3 2
H. 34
H·39

Part One
The Interpretation of Dasein in Terms of Temporality, and the
Explication of Time as the Transcendental Horizon for the
Question of Being

DIVISION ONE: PREPARA TORT FUNDAMENTAL ANALTSIS OF
DASEIN
I. EXPOSITION OF THE TASK OF A PREPARATORY ANALYSIS
OF DASEIN
H·4 1
<J. The theme of the analytic of Dasein
H·4 1

8

Being and Time
10. How the analytic of Dasein is to he distinguished
from anthropology, psychology, and hiology
II. The existential analytic and the Interpretation of
primitive Dasein. The difficulties of achieving a
'natural conception of the world'

Contents
H.

45

71

H.

50

76

H.

59

86

II. BEING-IN-THE-WORLD IN GENERAL AS THE BASIC STATE
OF DASEIN

12. A preliminary sketch of Being-in-the-world, in
terms of an orientation towards Being-in as such
13. A founded mode in which Being-in is exemplified.
Knowirig the world

III. THE WORLDHOOD OF THE WORLD

H. 63
14. The idea of the worldhood of the world in general H. 63
A. Anarysis ofenvironmentality and worldhood in general H. 66
15. The Being of the entities encountered in the environment
H. 66
16. How the worldly character of the environment
announces itself in entities within-the-world
H. 72
1 7. Reference and signs
H. 76
18. Involvement and significance: the worldhood of
the world
H. 83
B. A contrast between our anarysis of worldhood and
Descartes' Interpretation of the world
H. 89
19. The definition of the 'world' as Tes extensa
H. 89
20. Foundations of the ontological definition of the
'world'
H. 92
21. Hermeneutical discussion of the Cartesian ontology
of the 'world'
H. 95
c. The aroundness ofthe environment, andDasein's spatiality H. 101
22. Thespatialityoftheready-to-hand within-the-world H. 102
23. The spatiality of Being-in-the-world
H.I04
24. Space, and Dasein's spatiality
H. 110

IV. BEING-IN-THE-WORLD AS

BEING-WITH

AND

91
91
95
95
102
107
114
122
123
125
128
134
135
138
145

BEING-

ONE'S-SELF. THE 'THEY'

25. An approach to the existential question of the
"who" of Dasein
26. The Dasein-with of Others, and everyday Beingwith
27. Everyday Being-one's-Self and the "they"

9

V. BEING-IN AS SUCH

H. 113 149
H. 114 150
H. 117 153
H. 126 163

H. 130
H.134
H. 134
H.14°
H. 142
H.148
H.153
H. 160

169
17 2
17 2
179
182
188
195
20 3

H. 166
167
H.17°
H. 173
H. 175

210
211

H.180
39. The question of the primordial totality of
H.180
Dasein's structural whole
40. The hasic state-of-mind of anxiety as a distinctive way in which Dasein is disclosed
H. 184
41. Dasein's Being as care
H. 191
42. Confirmation of the existential Interpretation of
Dasein as care in terms of Dasein's pre-ontological way of interpreting itself
H.196
H.200
43. Dasein, worldhood, and Reality
(a) Reality as a prohlem ofBeing, and whether
the 'external world' can he proved
H.202
(b) Reality as an ontological prohlem
H. 209
(c) Reality and care
H. 211
H.212
44. Dasein, disclosedness, and truth
(a) The traditional conception oftruth, and its
ontological foundations
H. 21 4
(b) The primordial phenomenon of truth and
the derivative character of the traditional
conception of truth
H. 21 9
(c) The kind of Being which truth possesses,
and the presupposition of truth
H. 226

225

28. The task of a thematic analysis of Being-in
A. The eristential Constitution of the "there"
29. Being-there as state-of-mind
30. Fear as a mode of state-of-mind
31. Being-there as understanding
32. Understanding and interpretation
33. Assertion as a derivative mode of interpretation
34. Being-there and discourse. Language
B. The everyday Being of the "there", and the falling
of Dasein
35. Idle talk
36. Curiosity
37. Amhiguity
38. Falling and thrownness

VI. CARE AS THE BEING OF DASEIN

H.

228
235

257

10

Being and Time

Contents

DIVISION TWO: DASEIN AND TEMPORALITY

45. The outcome of the preparatory fundamental
analysis of Dasein, and the task of a primordial
existential Interpretation of this entity

H. 231

274

H. 235

279

H. 235

279

H. 237
H.24 1

281
285

H.246

29°

H.249

293

H. 252

29 6

H. 255

299

H. 260

3°4

H. 267

3 12

H. 267

3 12

H.27°
H. 272
H.274
H.280

3 15
3 17
3 19
3 25

H. 289

335

H. 295

34 1

1. DASEIN'S POSSIBILITY OF BEING-A-WHOLE, AND BEINGTOWARDS-DEATH
46. The seeming impossibility of getting Dasein's
Being-a-whole into our grasp ontologically and
determining its character
47· The possibility of experiencing the death of
Others, and the possibility of getting a whole
Dasein into our grasp
48 . That which is still outstanding; the end; totality
49· How the existential analysis of death is distinguished from other possible Interpretations of
this phenomenon
5°· Pre1iminary sketch of the existential-ontological
structure of death
51. Being-towards-death and the everydayness of
Dasein
52. Everyday Being-towards-the-end, and the full
existential conception of death
53· Existential projection of an authentic Being-towards-death
II. DASEIN'S ATTESTATION OF AN AUTHENTIC POTENTlALITY-FOR-BEING, AND RESOLUTENESS
54. The prohlem of how an authentic existentiell
possihility is attested
55. The existential-ontological foundations of conscience
56. The cbaracter of conscience as a calI
57· Conscience as the calI of care
58. Understanding the appeal, and guilt
59· The existential Interpretation of the conscience,
and the way conscience is ordinarily interpreted
60. The existential structure of the authentic potentiality-for-Being which is attested in the conscience

III. DASEIN'S AUTHENTIC POTENTIALITY-FOR-BEING-AWHOLE, AND TEMPORALITY AS THE ONTOLOGICAL
MEANING OF CARE
61. A preliminary sketch of the methodological step
from the definition of Dasein's authentic Beinga-whole to the laying-bare of temporality as a
phenomenon
62. Anticipatory resoluteness as the way in which
Dasein's potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has
existentiell authenticity
63· The hermeneutical situation at which we have
arrwed for Interpreting the meaning of the
Being of care; and the methodological character
of the existential analytic in general
64. Care and selfhood
65, Temporality as the ontological meaning of care
66. Dasein's temporality and the tasks arising therefrom of repeating the existential analysis in a
more primordial manner
IV. TEMPORALITY AND EVERYDAYNESS
67. The basic content of Dasein's existential constitution, and a preliminary sketch of the
temporal Interpretation of it
68. The temporality of disclosedness in general
(a) The temporality of understanding
(b) The temporality of state-of-mind
(c) The temporality of falling
(d) The temporality of discourse
69. The temporality of Being-in-the-world and the
problem of the transcendence of the world
(a) The temporality of circumspective concern
(b) The temporal meaning of the way in which
circumspective concern becomes modified
into the theoretical discovery of the presentat-hand within-the-world
(c) The temporal problem of the transcendence
of the world
70. The temporality of the spatiality that is characteristic of Dasein
71. The temporal meaning ofDasein's everydayness

Il

H·3 01

349

H·30 1

349

H·3 05

35 2

H·3 1O
H·3 16
H·3 23

358
364
370

H·33 1

380

H·334

38 3

H. 334
H·335
H·336
H·339
H·346
H·349

38 3
384
385
389
396
4°°

H·35 0
H·35 2

401
4 03

H·356

408

H. 364

4 15

H. 367
H·37°

4 18
121

I~

Bn~~dn~

V. TEMPORALITY AND HISTORICALITY
72. Existential-ontological exposition of the problem of history
73. The ordinary understanding of history, and
Dasein's historizing
74. The basic constitution of historicality
75. Dasein's historicality, and world-history
76. The existential source of historiology in Dasein's
historicality
77. The connection of the foregoing exposition ofthe
problem of historicality with the researches of
Wilhelm Dilthey and the ideas of Count Yorck
VI. TEMPORALITY AND WITHIN-TIME-NESS AS THE SOURCE
OF THE ORDINARY CONCEPTION OF TIME
78. The incompleteness of the foregoing temporal
analysis of Dasein
79. Dasein's temporality, and our concern with time
80. The time with which we concern ourselves, and
within-time-ness
81. Within-time-ness and the genesis of the ordinary
conception of time
82. A comparison of the existential-ontological
connection of temporality, Dasein, and worldtime, with Hegel's way of taking the relation
between time and spirit
(a) Hegel's conception of time
(b) Hegel's Interp!etation of the connection
between time and spirit
83. The existential-temporal analytic ofDasein, and
the question of fundamental ontology as to the
meaning of Being in general

Aulhor's Notes
Glossary of Germ~ Terms
Index

H. 372

424

H·37 2

4 24

TRANSLATORS' PREFACE

H. 378
H·382
H. 387

42 9
434
439

H·39 2

444

H. 397

449

H·404

456

H;404
H·406

45 6
45 8

H. 411

4 64

H·4 2O

47 2

H·428
H·4 28

480
480

H·433

484

H·43 6

486

MORE than thirty years have passed since Being and Ti~ first appeared,
and it has now become perhaps the most celebrated philosophical work
which Germany has produced in this century. It is a very difficult book,
even for the German reader, and highly resistant to translation, so much
so that it has often been called 'untranslatable'. We feel that this is an
exaggeration.
Anyone who has struggled with a philosophical work in translation has
constantly found himself asking how the author himself would have
expressed the ideaswhich the translator has ascribed to him. In this respect
the 'ideal' translation would perhaps be one so constructed that a reader
with reasonable linguistic competence and a key to the translator's conventions should be able to retranslate the new version into the very words
of the original. Everybody knows that this is altogether too much to
demand; but the faithful translator must at least keep this ahead of him
as a desirable though impracticable goal. The simplest compromise with
the demands of his own langugage is to present the translation and the
original text on opposite pages; he is then quite free to choose the most
felicitous expressions he can think of, trusting that the reader who is
shrewd enough to wonder what is really happening can look across and
find out.Such a procedurewould add enormouslyto the expense ofa book
as long as Bnng and Ti~, and is impracticable for other reasons. But on
any page of Heidegger there is a great deal happening, and we have felt
that we owe it to the reader to let him know what is going on. For the
benefit of the man who already has a copy of the German text, we have
indicated in our margins the pagination of the'later German editions,
which differs only slightly from that of the earlier ones. AlI citations
marked with 'H' refer to this pagination. But for the reader who does not
have the German text handy, we have had to use other devices.
As long as an author is using words in their ordinary ways, the translator should not have much trouble in showing what he is trying to say.
But Heidegger is constantly using words in ways which are by no means
ordinary, and a great part of his merit lies in the freshness and penetration which his very innovations reflect. He tends to discard much of the
traditional philosophical terminology, substituting an elaborate vocabulary of his own. He occasionally coins new expressions from oIder roots,
and he takes full advantage of the ease with which the German language
lends itself to the formation of new compounds. He also uses familiar

4 89
50 3
5 24

14

Being and Time

expressions in new ways. Adverbs, prepositions, pronouns, conjunctions
are made to do service as nouns; words which have undergone a long
history of semantical change are used afresh in their older senses; specialized modern idioms are generalized far beyond the limits within which
they would ordinarily be applicable. Puns are by no means uncommon
and frequently a key-word may be used in several senses, successively or
even simultaneously. He is especially fond of ringing the changes on
words with a common stem or a common prefix. He tends on the whole
to avoid personal constructions, and often uses abstract nouns ('Dasein',
'Zeitlichkeit', 'Sorge', 'In-der-Welt-sein', and so forth) as subjects of
sentences where a personal subject would ordinarily be found. Like
Aristotle or Wittgenstein, he likes to talk about his words, and seldom
makes an innovation without explaining it; but sometimes he will have
med a word in a special sense many times before he gets round to the
explanation; and he may often use it in the ordinary senses as well. In
such cases the reader is surely entitled to know what word Heidegger is
actually talking about, as well as what he says about it; and he is also
entitled to know when and how he actually uses it.
We have tried in the main to keep our vocabulary under control,
providing a German-English glossary for the more important expressions, and a rather full analytical index which will also serve as an EnglishGerman glossary. We have tried to use as few English terms as possible
to represent the more important German ones, and we have tried not to
to use these for other purposes than those we have specifically indicated.
Sometimes we have had to coin new terms to correspond to Heidegger's.
In a number of cases there are two German terms at the author's disposaI
which he has chosen to differentiate, even though they may be synonyms
in ordinary German usage; if we have found only one suitable English
term to correspond to them, we have sometimes adopted the device of
capitalizing it when it represents the German word to which it is etymologically closer: thus 'auslegen' becomes 'interpret', but 'interpretieren'
becomes 'Interpret'; 'gliedern' becomes 'articulate', but 'artikulieren'
becomes 'Articulate'; 'Ding' becomes 'Thing', but 'thing' represents
'Sache' and a number of other expressions. In other cases we have coined
a new term. Thus while 'tatsachlich' becomes 'factual', we have introduced 'factical' to represent 'faktisch'. We have often inserted German
expressions in square brackets on the occasions of their first appearance
or on that of their official definition. But we have also used bracketed
expressions to calI attention to departures from our usual conventions, or
to bring out etymological connections which might otherwise be overlooked.

~~@dTIme
15
In many cases bracketing is insufficient, and we have introduced footnotes of our own, discussing some of the more important terms on the
occasion oftheir first appearance. We have not hesitated to quote German
sentences at length when they have been ambiguous or obscure; while we
have sometimes taken pains to show wherethe ambiguity lies, we have
more often left this to the reader to puzzle out for himself. We have often
quoted passages with verbal subtl~ties which would otherwise be lost in
translation. We have also called attention to a number of significant
differences between the earlier and later editions of Heidegger's work.
The entire book was reset for the seventh edition; while revisions were by
no means extensive, they went beyond the simple changes in punctuation
and citation which Heidegger mentions in hiS preface. We have chosen the
third edition (1931) as typical of the earlier editions, and the eighth
(1957) as typical of the later ones. In general we have preferred the readings of the eighth edition, and our marginal numbering and cross-references
follow its pagination. Heidegger's very valuable footnotes have been
renumbered with roman numerals and placed at the end of the text
where we trust they will be given the attention they deserve. Hoping that
our own notes will be of immediate use to the reader, we have placed
them at the bottoms of pages for easy reference, indicating them with
arabic numerals.
In general we have tried to stick to the text as closely as we can without
sacrificing intelligibility; but we have made numerous concessions to the
reader at the expense of making Heidegger less Heideggerian. We have,
for instance, frequently used personal constructions where Heidegger has
avoided them. We have also tried to be reasonably flexible in dealing with
hyphenated expressions. Heidegger does not seem to be especially consistent in his use of quotation marks, though in certain expressions (for
instance, the word 'Welt') they are very deliberately employed. Except in
a few footnote references and some of the quotations from Hegel and
Count Yorck in the two concluding chapters, our single quotation marks
represent Heidegger's double ones. But wehave felt free to introduce
double ones of our own wherever we feel that they may be helpful to
the reader. We have followed a similar policy with regard to italicization.
When Heidegger uses italics in the later editions (or spaced type in the
earlier ones) , we have generally used italics; but in the relatively few cases
where we have felt that some emphasis of our own is needed, we have
resorted to wide spacing. We have not followed Heidegger in the use of
italics for proper names or for definite articles used demonstratively ta
introduce restrictive relative clauses. But we have followed the muaI
practice ofitalicizing words and phrases from languages other than English

16
Being and Time
and German, and have italicized tides of books, regardless of Heidegger's
procedure.
We have received he1p from severa! sources. Miss Marjorie Ward has
collated the third and eighth editions, and made an extremely careful
study of Heidegger's vocabulary and ours, which has saved us from
innumerable inconsistencies and many downright mistakes; there is hardly
a page which has not profited by her assistance. We are also indebted
to severa! persons who have he1ped us in various ways: Z. Adamczewski,
Hannah Arendt, J. A. Burzle, C. A. Campbell, G. M. George, Fritz Heider,
Edith Kern, Norbert Raymond, Eva Schaper, Martin Scheerer, John
Wild. If any serious errors remain, they are probably due to our fallure
to exploit the time and good nature of these friends and colleagues more
unmerciful1y. We are particularly indebted to Professor R. Gregor Smith
who brought us together in the first place, and who, perhaps more than
anyone e1se, has made it possible for this translation to be presented to
the public. We also wish to express our appreciation to our publis~lers
and to Max Niemeyer Verlag, holders of the German copyright, who have
shown extraordinary patience in putting up with the long de1ay in the
preparation of our manuscript.
We are particularly grateful to the University of Kansas for gen.::rous
research grants over a period of three years, and to the University of
Kansas Endowment Association for enabling us to work together in
Scotland.

AUTHOR'S PREFACE TO THE SEVENTH GERMAN
EDITION
THIS treatise first appeared in the spring of 1927 in the Jahrbuch fiT
Phiinomenologie und phiinomenologische FOTschung edited by Edmund Husserl,
and was published simultaneously in a special printing.
The present reprint, which appears as the seventh edition, is unchanged
in the text, but has been newly revised with regard to quotations and
punctuation. The page-numbers of this reprint agree with those of the
earlier editions except for minor deviations. 1
While the previous editions have borne the designation 'First Half',
this has now been deleted. Mter a quarter of a century, the second half .
could no longer be added unless the first were to be presented anew. Yet
the road it has taken remains even today a necessary one, if our Dasein is
to be stirred by the question of Being.
For the elucidati~n ofthis question the reader may refer to my Einführung
in die Metaphysik, which is appearing simultaneously with this reprinting
under the same publishers. 2 This work presents the text of a course of
lectures delivered in the summer semester of 1935.
1 See Translators' Preface, p. 15.
Il Max

Niemeyer Verlag, Tübingen, 1953. English translation by Ralph Manheim,
Yale University Press and Oxford University Press, 1959.

BEING AND TIME
••• 8ijÀov yàp wS' vl-"€îS' I-"~V TaVTa (Tl 7TOT€ {300À€u(}€ C1'YJl-"alv€w o7T<hav ÔV
€'Y'Y'7" € 7Tal\(U Y'YVWUK€T€, 7J1-"€'S' O€ 7TPO TOV I-"€V CP0I-"€ a J VVY 0 7J7TOp7JKal-"€v, ••

.J.() J
'f'

(})

J \

J

•

~ \

\

_

\

,

J

()

_~"

J

'For manifestly you have long been aware of what you mean when you
use the expression "being". We, however, who used to think we understood it, have now become perplexed.'l
Do we in our time have an answer to the question of what we reaIly
mean by the word 'being'?l Not at aIl. So it is fitting that we should
raise anew the question of the meaning 2 of Being. But are we nowadays even
perplexed at our inability to understand the expression 'Being'? Not at
aIl. So first of aIl we must reawaken an understanding for the meaning of
this question. Our aim in the following treatise is to work out the question
of the meaning of Being and to do so concretely. Our provisional aim
is the Interpretation 3 of time as the possible horizon for any understanding
whatsoever of Being. 4.
But the reasons for making this our aim, the investigations which such
a purpose requires, and the path to its achievement, calI for sorne introductory remarks.
l 'seiend'. Heidegger translates Plato's present participle av by this present participle
of the verb 'sein' ('to be'). We accordingly translate 'seiend' here and in a number of
later passages by the present participle 'being'; where such a translation is inconvenient
we shaH resort to other constructions, usuaHy subjoining the German word in brackets or
in a footnote. The 'participle 'seiend' must be distinguished from the infinitive 'sein',
which we shaH usually translate either by the infinitive 'to be' or by the gerund 'being'.
It must aiso be distinguished from the important substantive 'Sein' (always capitalized),
which we shail translate as 'Being' (capitalized), and from the equally important substantive 'Seiendes', which is directly derived from 'seiend', and which we shaH usually
translate as 'entity' or 'entities'. (See our note 6, H. 3 beIow.)
2 'Sinn.' In view of the importance of the distinction between 'Sinn' and 'Bedeutung'
in German writers as diverse as Diithey, Husserl, Frege and Schlick, we shaH translate
'Sinn' by 'meaning' or 'sense', depending on the context, and keep 'signification' and
'signify' for 'Bedeutung' and 'bedeuten'. (The verb 'mean' will occasionally be used to
translate such verbs as 'besagen', 'sagen', 'heissen' and 'meinen', but the noun 'meaning'
will be reserved for 'Sinn'.) On 'Sinn', see H. 151, 324; on 'Bedeutung', etc., see H. 87,
and our note 47 ad loc.
a Heidegger uses two words which might weH he translated as 'interpretation': 'Auslegung' and 'Interpretation'. Though in many cases these may be regarded as synonyms,
their connotations are not quite the same. 'Auslegung' seems to be used in a broad sense
to coyer any activity in which we interpret something 'as' something, whereas 'Interpretation' seems to apply to interpretations which are more theoretical or systematic, as
in the exegesis ofa text. See especially H. 148 ff. and 199 f. We shaH preserve this distinction by writing 'interpretation' for 'Auslegung', but 'Interpretation' fo.r Heidegger's
'Interpretation', following similar conventions for the verbs 'auslegen' and 'interpretieren'.
4 ' • • • ais des moglichen Horizontes eines jeden Seinsverstiindnisses überhaupt .. .'
Throughout this work the word 'horizon' is used with a connotation somewhat different
from that to which the English-speaking reader is IikeIy to be accustomed. We tend to
think of a horizon as something which we may widen or extend or go beyond; Heidegger,
however, seems to think of it rather as something which we can neither widen nor go
beyond, but which provides the limits for certain intellectual activities performed 'within' it.

INTRODUCTION
EXPOSITION OF THE QUESTION OF
THE MEANING OF BEING

1
THE NECESSITY, STRUCTURE, AND PRIORITY
OF THE QUESTION OF BEING
~ r. The Necessity for Explicitfy Restating the Question of Being

THIS question has today been forgotten. Even though in our time we
deem it progressive to give our approval to 'metaphysics' again, it is held
that we have been exempted from the exertions of a newly rekindled·
'Y'YaVTop,axta 7Tfpl rijf; ovataf;. Yetthe question we are touching upon is notjust
a n y question. 1t is one which provided a stimulus for the researches of
Plato and Aristotle, only to subside from then on as a theme for actual
investigation.! What these two men achieved was to persist through many
alterations and 'retouchings' down to the 'logic' of Hegel. And what
they wrested with the utmost intellectual effort from the phenomena,
fragmentary and incipient though it was, has long since become
trivialized.
Not only that. On the basis of the Greeks' initial contributions towards
an Interpretation of Being, a dogma has been developed which not only
declares the question about the meaning of Being to be superfiuous, but
sanctions its complete neglect. It is said that 'Being' is the most universal
and the emptiest of concepts. As such it resists every attempt at definition.
Nor does this most universal and hence indefinable concept require any
definition, for everyone uses it constantly and already understands what
he means by it. In this way, that which tp,_ ancient philosophers found
continually disturbing as something obscure and hidden has taken on a
clarity and self-evidence such that if anyone continues ta ask about it he
is charged with an error of method.
At the beginning of our investigation it is not possible ta give a detailed
1 ' .•• ais thematische Fragt wirklichtr Unltrsuchung'. When Heidegger speaks of a question
as 'thematisch', he thinks ofit as one which is taken seriously and studied in a systematic
manner. While we shaH often translate this adjective by its cognate, 'thematic', we may
sometimes ·find it convenient to choose more flexible expressions involving the word
'theme'. (Heidegger gives a fuller discussion on H. 363.)

Being and Time
INT. 1
account of the presuppositions and prejudices which are constantly
reimplanting and fostering the beliefthat an inquiry into Being is unnecessary. They are rooted in ancient ontology itself, and it will not be possible
to interpret that ontology adequately until the question ofBeing has been
clarified and answered and taken as a clue-at least, if we are to have
regard for the soil From which the basic ontological concepts developed,
and if we are to see whether the categories have been demonstrated in a
way that is appropriate and complete. We shaH therefore carry the discussion of these presuppositions only to the point at which the necessity
for restating the question about the meaning of Being become plain.
There are three such presuppositions.
1. First, it has been maintained that 'Being' is the 'most universal'
concept: 'Tà av Jan Ka86Àov p.aÀ'U'Ta 7TaV'TWv. 1 lliud quod primo eadit sub
apprehensione est ens, cuius intelieetus includitur in omnibus, quaeeumque quis
apprehendit. 'An understanding of Being is already included in conceiving
anything which one apprehends as an entity.'l,U But the 'universality' of
'Being' is not that of a class or genus. The term 'Being' does not define that
realm of entities which is uppermost when these are Articulated conceptuaHy according to genus and species: oiJ'T€ 'Tà av 'Y'vos.lU The 'universality' ofBeing 'transeends' any universality of genus. In medieval ontology
'Being' is designated as a 'transeendens'. Aristotle himselfknew the unity of
this transcendental 'universal' as a uniry of analogy in contrast to the
multiplicity of the highest generic concepts applicable to things. With
this discovery, in spite of his dependence on the way in which the
ontological question had been formulated by Plato, he put the problem
ofBeing on what was, in principle, a new basis. To be sure, even Aristotle
failed to clear away the darkness of these categorial interconnections. In
medieval ontology this problem was widely discussed, especially in the
Thomist and Scotist schools, without reaching clarity as to principles.
And when Hegel at last defines 'Being' as the 'indeterminate immediate'
and makes this definition basic for aIl the further categorial explications
of his 'logic', he keeps looking in the same direction as ancient ontology,
22

3

l ' " ••• was einer am Seienden erfasst" '. The word 'Seiendes', which Heidegger uses
in his paraphrase, is one of the most important words in the book. The substantive 'das
Seiende' is derived from the participle 'seiend' (see note l, p. 19), and means literally
'that which is'; 'ein Seiendes' means 'somet)1ing which is'. There is much to be said for
translating 'Seiendes' by the noun 'being' or 'beings' (for it is often used in a collective
sense). We feel, however, that it is smoother and less confusing to write 'entity' or 'entities'. We are weil aware that in recent British and American philosophy the term
'entity' has been used more generally to apply to almost anything whatsoever, no matter
wh:,-t i~ ~ntological sta.tus. In this .translation, ho~ever, it ~ill !De";ll simply 'something
WhlC~ .IS. An alternatIve translatH;)ll of the Latm quotatlon IS glVen by the English
Dommlcan Fathers, Summa Theologlca, Thomas Baker, London, 1915: 'For that which,
before aught else, falls under apprehension, is being, the notion ofwhich is included in ail
things whatsoever a man apprehends.'

Being and Time
23
except that he no longer pays heed to Aristotle's problem of the unity of
Being as over against the multiplicity of 'categories' applicable to
things. So if it is said that 'Being' is the most universal concept, this
cannot mean that it is the one which is clearest or that it needs no further
discussion. It is rather the darkest of aU.
2. It has been maintained secondly that the concept of 'Being' is
indefinable. This is deduced From its supreme universality,lv and rightly
so, if definitio fit per genus proximum et differentiam speei.ficam. 'Being' cannot
indeed be conceived as an entity; enti non additur aliqua natura: nor can it
acquire such a character as to have the term "entity" applied to it.
:'Being" cannot be derived From higher concepts by definition, nor can
It be presented through lower ones. But does this imply that 'Being' no
longer offers a problem? Not at aIl. We can infer only that 'Being' cannot
have the character ofan entity. Thus we cannot apply to Being the concept
of'definition' as presented in traditionallogic, which itselfhas its foundations in ancient ontology and which, within certain limits, provides a
quite justifiable way of defining "entities". The indefinability of Being
does not eliminate the question of its meaning; it demands that we look
that question in the face.
3· Thirdly, it is held that 'Being' is of aIl concepts the one that is self·
evident. Whenever one cognizes anything or makes an assertion, whenever
one comports oneself towards entities, even towards oneself, 1 sorne use
is made of 'Being'; and this expression is held to be intelligible 'without
further ado', just as everyone understands "The sky is blue', '1 am merry',
and the like. But here we have an average kind of intelligibility, which
merely demonstrates that this is unintelligible. It makes manifest that in
any way of comporting oneself towards entities as entities-even in any
Being towards entities as entities-there lies a priori an enigma. 2 The very
fact that we already live in an understanding ofBeing and that the meaning ofBeing is still veiled in darkness proves that it is necessaryin principle
to raise this question again.
Within the rangeofbasic philosophical concepts-especiallywhenwe come
to the concept of'Being'-it is a dubious procedure to invoke self-evidence,
evenif the 'self-evident' (Kant's 'covertjudgments of the common reason') 3
INT. 1

l ' . . . in jedem Verhalten zu Seiendem, in jedem Sich·zu-sich-selbst-verhalten .. .'
The verb 'verhalten' can refer to any kind of behaviour or way of conducting oneself,
even to the way in which one relates oneself to something else, or to the way one refrains
or holds oneselfback. We shall translate it in various ways.
2 'Sie macht offenbar, dass in jedem Verhalten und Sein zu Seiendem ais Seiendem a
priori ein Riitselliegt.' The phrase 'Sein zu Seiendem' is typical of many similar expressions
in which the substantive 'Sein' is followed by the preposition 'zu'. In such expressions
we shall usually translate 'zu' as 'towards': for example, 'Being-towards-death', 'Being
towards Others', 'Being towards entities within-the-world'.
3' "die geheimen Urteile der gemeinen Vernunft" '.

4

R4
Being and Time
INT. 1
is to become the sole explicit and abiding theme for one's analytic'the business of philosophers'.
By considering these prejudices, however, we have made plain not only
that the question of Being lacks an answer, but that the question itself is
obscure and without direction. So if it is to be revived, this means that
we must first work out an adequate way offormulating it.

5

~ 2. The Formal Structure of the Question of Being

The question of the meaning of Being must be formulated. If it is a
fundamental question, or indeed the fundamental question, it must be
made transparent, and in an appropriate way.l We must therefore
explain briefly what belongs to any question whatsoever, so that from this
standpoint the question of Being can be made visible as a very special one
with its own distinctive character.
Every inquiry is a seeking [Suchen]. Every seeking gets guided beforehand by what is sought. Inquiry is a cognizant seeking for an entity both
with regard to the fact th a t it is and with regard to its Being as it is. lI
This cognizant seeking can take theform of'investigating' ["Untersuchen"],
in which one lays bare that which the question is about and ascertains its
character. Any inquiry, as an inquiry about something, has that which is
asked about [sein Gefragtes]. But aU inquiry about something is somehow a
questioning of something [Anfragen bei ...]. So in addition to what is
asked about, an inquiry has that which is interrogated rein Befragtes]. In
investigative questions-that is, in questions which are specificaUy theoretical-what is asked about is determined and conceptualized. Furthermore, in what is asked about there lies also that which is to be found out by
the asking [das Erfragte]; this is what is reaUy intended: 3 with this the
inquiry reaches its goal. Inquiry itselfis the behaviour ofa questioner, and
therefore ofan entity, and as such has its own character ofBeing. When one
makes an inquiry one may do so 'just casuaUy' or one may formulate the
1 ' ••• dann bedarf solches Fragen der angemessenen Durchsichtigkeit'. The adjective
'durchsichtig' is one of Heidegger's favourite expressions, and means simply 'transparent',
'perspicuous', something that one can 'see through'. We shall ordinarily translate it by
'transparent'. See H. 146 for further discussion.
Il ' ••• in seinem Dass- und Sosein'.
3 ' ••• das eigentlich Intendierte .. .' The adverb 'eigentlich' occurs very often in this
work. It may he used informally where one might write 'really' or 'on its part', or in a
much stronger sense, where something like 'genuinely' or 'authentically' would be more
appropriate. It is not always possible to tell which meaning Heidegger has in mind. In the
contexts which seem relatively informaI we shall write 'really'; in the more technical
passages we shall write 'authentically', reserving 'genuinely' for 'genuin' or 'eclit'. The
reader must not confuse this kind of 'authenticity' with the kind, which helongs to an
'authentic text' or an 'authentic account'. See H. 42 for further discussion. In the present
passage, the verb 'intendieren' is presumably used in the medieval sense of 'intending', as
adapted and modified by Brentano and Husserl.

INT. 1

Being and Time

25

question explicitly. The latter case is peculiar in that the inquiry does not
become transparent to itself until aU these constitutive factors of the
question have themselves become transparent.
The question about the meaning of Being is to beformulated. We must
therefore discuss it with an eye to these structural items.
Inquiry, as a kind of seeking, must be guided beforehand by what is
sought. So the meaning of Being must already be available to us in sorne
way. As we have intimated, we always conduct our activities in an'understanding of Being. Out of this understanding arise both the explicit question of the meaning of Being and the tendency that leads us towards its
conception. We do not know what 'Being' means. But even if we ask,
'What is "Being"?', we keep within an understanding of the 'is', though
we are unable to fix conceptionaUy what that 'is' signifies. We do not
even know the horizon in terms of which that meaning is to be grasped
and fixed. But this vague average understanding ofBeing is still li Fact.
However much this understanding ofBeing (an understanding which is
already available to us) may fluctuate and grow dim, and border on mere
acquaintance with a word, its very indefiniteness is itself a positive phenomenon which needs to be clarified. An investigation of the meaning of
Being cannot be expected to give this clarification at the outset. If we are
to obtain the clue we need for Interpreting this average understanding of
Being, we must first develop the concept of Being. In the light of this
concept and the ways in which it may be explicitly understood, we can
make out what this obscured or stiU unillumined understanding of Being
means, and what kinds of obscuration--or hindrance to an explicit
illumination--of the meaning of Being are possible and even inevitable.
Further, this vague average understanding of Being may be so infiltrated with traditional theories and opinions about Being that these
remain hidden as sources of the way in which it is prevalently understood.
What we seek when we inquire into Being is not something entirely
unfamiliar, even ifproximaUyl we cannot grasp it at aU.
ln the question which we are to work out, what is asked about is Beingthat which determines entities as entities, that on the basis of which
1 'zuniichst'. This word is of very frequent occurrence in Heidegger, and he will
discuss his use ofit on H. 370 below. In ordinary German usage the word may mean 'at
first', 'to begin with', or 'in the first instance', and we shall often translate it in such ways.
The word· is, however, cognate with the adjective 'nah' and its superlative 'niic!lst',
which we shall usually translate as 'close' and 'closest' respectively; and Heidegger often
uses 'zuniichst' in the sense of 'most closely', when he is describing the most 'natural' and
'obvious' experiences which we have at an uncritical and pre-philosophical level. We
have ventured to translate this Heideggerian sense of'zuniic!lst' as 'proximally', but there
are many border-line cases where it is not clear whether Heidegger has in mind this
special sense or one of the more general usages, and in such cases we have chosen whatever
expression seeIns stylistically preferable.

6

26

7

Being and Time

INT. 1

[woraufhin] entities are already understood, however we may discuss
them in detail. The Being of entities ois' not itself an entity. If we are to
understand the problem of Being, our first philosophical step consists in
not fLÛ(Jov T'va 8'7Jy€'iu(Jw.,v in not 'telling a story'-that is to say, in not
defining entities as entities by tracing them back in their origin to sorne
other entities, as if Being had the character of sorne possible entity. Hence
Being, as that which is asked about, must be exhibited in a way ofits own,
essentiaHy different from the way in which entities are discovered. Accordingly, what is ta be found out by the asking-the meaning of Being-also
demands that it be conceived in a way of its own, essentiaHy contrasting
with the concepts in which entities acquire their determinate signification.
ln so far as Being constitutes what is asked about, and "Being" means
the Being of entities, then entities themselves turn out to be what is interrogated. These are, so to speak, questioned as regards their Being. But if
the characteristics of their Being can be yielded without falsification, then
these entities must, on their part, have become accessible as they are in
themselves. When we come to what is to be interrogated, the question of
Being requires that the right way of access to entities shaH have been
obtained and secured in advance. But there are many things which we
designate as 'being' ["seiend"], and we do so in various senses. Everything
we talk about, everything we have in view, everything towards which we
comport ourselves in any way, is being; what we are is being, and so is
how we are. Being lies in the fact that something is, and in its Being as it is;
in Reality; in presence-at-hand; in subsistence; in validity; in Dasein;
in the 'there iS'.1 ln which entities is the meaning of Being to be discerned?
From which entities is the disclosure of Being to take its departure? Is
the starting-point optional, or does sorne particular entity have priority
when we come to work out the question of Being? Which entity shaH we
take for our example, and in what sense does it have priority?
If the question about Being is to be explicitly formulated and carried
through in such a manner as to be completely transparent to itself, then
any treatment of it in line with the elucidations we have given requires
us to explain how Being is to be looked at, how its meaning is to be understood and conceptuaHy grasped; it requires us to prepare the way for
choosing the right entity for our example, and to work out the genuine
way ofaccess to it. Looking at something, understanding and conceiving it,
choosing, access to it-aH these ways ofbehaving are constitutive for our
inquiry, and therefore are modes of Being for those particular entities
l'Sein liegt im Dass- und Sosein, in Realitiit, Vorhandenheit, Bestand, Ge1tung,
Dasein, im "es gibt".' On 'Vorhandenheit' ('presence-at-hand') see note 1, p. 48, H. 25·
On 'Dasein', see note l, p. 27.

INT. 1

Being and Time

27

w~ich we, the inquirers, are ourselves. Thus to work out the question of

Bemg adequately, we must make an entity-the inquirer-transparent in
his own Being. The very asking of this question is an entity's mode of
Being; and as such it gets its essential character from what is inquired
about-namely, Being. This entity which each of us is himselfand which
includes inquiring as one of the possibilities of its Being, we shaH denote
by the term "Dasein".1 If we are to formulate our question explicitly and
transparently, we must first give a proper explication ofan entity (Dasein),
with regard to its Being.
Is there not, however, a manifest circularity in such an undertaking?
If we must first define an entity in ils Being, and if we want to formulate
the question of Being only on this basis, what is this but going in a circle?
ln working out our question, have we not 'presupposed' something which
only the answer can bring? Formal objections such as the argument
about 'circular reasoning', which can easily be cited at any time in the
study of first principles, are always sterile when one is considering
concrete ways ofinvestigating. When it cornes to understanding the matter
at hand, they carry no weight and keep us from penetrating into the field
ofstudy.
But factically 2 there is no circle at aIl in formulating our question as
we have described. One can determine the nature ofentities in their Being
without necessarily having the explicit concept of the meaning of Being
at one's disposal. Otherwise there could have been no ontological knowledge heretofore. One would hardly deny that facticaHy there has been
such knowledge. 3 Of course 'Being' has been presupposed in all ontology
up till now, but not as a concept at one's disposal-not as the sort of thing
we are seeking. This 'presupposing1 of Being has rather the character of
taking a look at it beforehand, so that in the light of it the entities presented to us get provisionaHy Articulated in their Being. This guiding
1 The wo~d 'Dasei~' plays 50 important a role in this.work and is already 50 familiar
to the. English-speaking read~r who has !ead about Held~, that it seems simpler ta
leave It. untr~lated except I~ the ~~tively rar«: passages m which Heidegger himself
breaks It up WIth a hypthen (Da-sem) to show Its etymological construction: literally
'Being-there'. Though in traditional German philo5Ophy it may be used quite generally to
stan~ f~r alm~st any kind of Being o.r 'existence' which we can say that 50mething kas
(the exIStence ofGod, for example), m everyday usage it tends to he used more narrowly
~o st~nd for the kind ofBeing that helongs to persons. Heidegger follows the everyday usage
m thlS respect, but goes 50mewhat further in that he often uses it ta stand for any person
who has such Bcing, and who is thus an 'entity' himse1f. See H. Il be1ow.
li :f~k~ch'. While this won! ~ often he translated simply as 'in fact' or 'as a matter of
fact , It 15 used both as an adjective and as an adverb and is 50 characteristic of Heidegger's style ~at we sh:ùl as. a ruIe. translate it either as 'factical' or as 'factically', thus
preservmg Its connection Wlth the Important noun 'Faktizitiit' (facticity') and keeping it
distinct from 'tatsiichlich' ('factual') and 'wirklich' ('actual'). See the discussion of
'Tat:lichlichkeit' and 'Faktizitlit' in Sections 12 and 29 below (H. 56, 135)'
8 ••• deren faktischen Bestand man wohl nicht leugnen wird'.

8

Being and Time
INT. 1
activity of taking a look at Being arises from thë average understanding
of Being in which we aiways operate and which in the end belongs to the
essential constitution l of Dasein itself. Such 'presupposing' has nothing to do
with Iaying down an axiom from which a sequence of propositions is
deductively derived. It is quite impossible for there to be any 'circular
argument' in formulating the question about the meaning of Being; for
in answering this question, the issue is not one of grounding something
by such a derivation; it is rather one of Iaying bare the grounds for it
and exhibiting them. :1
ln the question of the meaning of Being there is no 'circular reasoning'
but rather a remarkable 'relatedness backward or forward' which what
we are asking about (Being) bears to the inquiry itselfas a mode ofBeing
of an entity. Here what is asked about has an essentiai pertinence to the
inquiry itself, and this belongs to the ownmost meaning [eigensten Sinn]
of the question ofBeing. This only means, however, that there is a wayperhaps even a very special one-in which entities with the character of
Dasein are related to the question ofBeing. But have we not thus demonstrated that a certain kind ofentity has a priority with regard to its Being?
And have we not thus presented that entity which shall serve as the
primary example to be interrogated in the question of Being? So far our
discussion has not demonstrated Dasein's priority, nor has it shown
decisively whether Dasein may possibly or even necessarily serve as the
primary entity to be interrogated. But indeed something Iike a priority of
Dasein has announced itself.
28

Vpr.
cirkularnosti.

, 3· The Ontological Priority of the Question of Being
When we pointed out the characteristics of the question of Being,
taking as our clue the formaI structure of the question as such, we made it
l 'Wesensverfassung'. 'Verfassung' is the standard word for the 'constitution' of a
nation or any political organization, but it is also used for the 'condition' or 'state' in
which a person may find himself. Heidegger seldom uses the word in either of these senses'
but he does use it in ways which are somewhat analogous. In one sense Dasein's 'Ver~
fassung' is .its 'constitution', the way it is constituted, 'sa condition humaine'. In another
sense
,may ~av.e s;veral 'Ver!assungen' as constitutive 'states' or factors which
~nter ~nt~ lts cons,tltutlOn: We shaH, m general, translate 'Verfassung' as 'constitution' or
constltutlve state accordmg to the contextj but in passages where 'constitutive state'
~ould be cumbersome and there is litde danger of ambiguity, we shaH simply write
state'. These states, however, must always be thought of
constitutive and essential
not
temporary or transitory stages like the 'state' of one's health or the 'state of th~
nation'. When Heidegger uses the word 'Konstitution', we shaH usually indicate this by
cafitalizing 'Constitution'.
'... weil es in. der Beantwortun~ der Frage nicht um eine ableitende Begründung,
sonde~ um aufwelsende l?run?-Freilegung geht.' Expressions of the form 'es geht ...
~m:- a~pear very o~en ln thls work. We shall usually translate them by variants on
-IS an Issue for . . .•

pasc:m

as

as

INT. 1
Being and Time
29
clear that this question is a peculiar one, in that a series of fundamentai
considerations is required for working it out, not to mention for solving
it. But its distinctive features will come fully to light only when we have
delimited it adequately with regard to its function, its aim, and its
motives.
Hitherto our arguments for showing that the question must be restated
have been motivated in part by its venerable origin but chiefly by the lack 9
of a definite answer and even by the absence of any satisfactory formulation of the question itself. One may, however, ask what purpose this question is supposed to serve. Does it simply remain-or is it at all-a mere
matter for soaring speculation about the most general of generalities, or
is it rather, of ail questions, both the most basic and the most concrete?
Being is always the Being of an entity. The totality of entities can, in
accordance with its various domains, become a field for Iaying bare
and delimiting certain definite areas of subject-matter. These areas, on
their part (for instance, history, Nature, space, life, Dasein, language,
and the like), can serve _as objects which corresponding scientific
investigations may take as their respective themes. Scientific research
accomplishes, roughly and naïvely, the demarcation and initial fixing of
the areas of subject-matter. The basic structures of any such area have
already been worked out after a fashion in our pre-scientific ways of
experiencing and interpreting that domain of Being in which the area of
subject-matter is itself confined. The 'basic concepts' which thus arise
remain our proximal clues for disclosing this area concretely for the fust
time. And although research may always Iean towards this positive
approach, its real progress cornes not so much from collecting results and
storing them away in 'manuals' as from inquiring into the ways in which
each particular area is basically constituted [Grundverfassungen]-an
inquiry to which we have been driven mostly by reacting against just
such an increase in information.
The real 'movement' of the sciences takes place when their basic concepts undergo a more or less radical revision which is transparent to itself.
The level which a science has reached is determined by how far it is
capable of a crisis in its basic concepts. In such immanent crises the very
relationship between positively investigative inquiry and those things
themselves that are under interrogation cornes to a point where it begins
to totter. Among the various disciplines everywhere today there are
freshly awakened tendencies to put research on new foundations.
Mathematics, which is seemingly the most rigorous and most firm1y
constructed of the sciences, has reached a crisis in its 'foundations'. In
the controversy between the formalists and the intuitionists, the issue is

Being and Time
INT. 1
one of obtaining and securing the primary way of access to what are
supposedly the objects of this science. The relativity theory of p~sics
arises from the tendency to exhibit the interconnectedness of Nature as
it is 'in itself'. As a theory of the conditions under which we have access
to Nature itself, it seeks to preserve the changelessness of the laws of
motion by ascertaining all relativities, and thus comes up against the
question of the structure of its own given area of study-the problem of
matter. In biology there is an awakening tendency to inquire beyond the
definitions which mechanism and vitalism have given fOF "life" and
"organism", and to define anew the kind of Being which belongs to the
living as such. In those humane sciences which are historiological in character, l
the urge towards historical actuality itself has been strengthened in the
course of time by tradition and by the way tradition has been presented
and handed down: the history of literature is to become the history of
problems. Theology is seeking a more primordial interpretation of man's
Being towards Gad, prescribed by the meaning offaith itselfand remaining
within it. It is slowly beginning to understand once more Luther's insight
that the 'foundation' on which its system of dogma rests has not arisen
from an inquiry in which faith is primary, and that conceptual1y this
'foundation' not only is inadequate for the problematic of theology, but
conceals and distorts it.
Basic concepts determine the way in which we get an understanding
beforehand of the area of subject-matter underlying aH the objects a
science takes as its theme, and aH positive investigation is guided by this
understanding. Only after the area itself has been explored beforehand
in a corresponding manner do these concepts become genuinely demonstrated and 'grounded'. But since every such area is itself obtained from
the domain of entities themselves, this preliminary research, from which
the basic concepts are drawn, signifies nothing else than an interpretation
of those entities with regard to their basic state of Being. Such research
must run ahead of the positive sciences, and it cano Here the work of Plato
and Aristotle is evidence enough. Laying the foundations for the sciences
in this way is different in principle from the kind of 'logic' which limps
along after, investigating the status of some science as it chances to find
it, in order to discover its 'method'. Laying the foundations, as we have
described it, is rather a productive logic-in the sense that it leaps ahead,
30

10

l'In den histcriscMn GeistlswissenscJuzften •••' Heidegger makes much of the distinction
between 'Historie' and 'Geschichte' and the corresponding adjectives 'historisch' and
'geschichtlich'. 'Historie' stands for what Heidegger calls a 'science of history'. (See
H. 375,378.) 'Geschichte' usually stands for the kind of'history' that actually Juzppens. We
shall as a rule translate these respective1y as 'historiology' and 'history', following similar
conventions in handling the two adjectives. See especially Sections 6 and 76 below.

INT. 1
Being and Time
31
as it were, into some area of Being, discloses it for the first time in the
constitution of its Being, and, after thus arriving at the structures within
it, makes these available to the positive sciences as transparent assignments for their inquiry.l To give an example, what is philosophicaHy
primary is neither ~ theory of the concept-formation of historiology nor
the theory of historiological knowledge, nor yet the theory of history as
the O,bject of historiology; what is primary is rather the Interpretation of
authenticaHy historical entities as regards their historicality. 2 Similarly
the positive outcome of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason lies in what it has
contributed towards the working out of what belongs to any Nature
whatsoever, not in a 'theory' ofknowledge. His transcendentallogic is an
a priori logic for the subject-matter of that area of Being called "Nature".
But such an inquiry itself-ontology taken in the widest sense without
favouring any particular ontological directions or tendencies-requires a
further clue. Ontological inqury is indeed more primordial, as over against
the ontica1 3 inquiry of the positive sciences. But it remains itselfnaïve and
opaque if in its researches into the Being of entities it fails to discuss the
meaning of Being in general. And even the ontological task of constructing a non-deductive genealogy of the different possible ways of Being
requires that we first come to an understanding of 'what we really mean
by this expression "Being" '.
The question of Being aims therefore at ascertaining the a priori condi·
tions not only for the possibility of the sciences which examine entities
as entities of such and such a type, and, in so doing, already operate
with an understanding of Being, but also for the possibility of those
ontologies themselves which are prior to the ontical sciences and which
provide their foundations. Basically, ail ontology, no matter how rich and
firmly compacted a system of categories it has at its disposal, remains blind and perverfcd from ifs ownmosf aim, if if has not first adequately clarified the meaning
of Being, and conceived this clarification as its fundamental task.
Ontological research itself, when properly understood, gives to the
question ofBeing an ontological priority which goes beyond mere resumption of a venerable tradition and advancement with a problem that has
hitherto been opaque. But this objectively scientific priority is not the
onlyone.
t ' ••• ais durchsichtige Anweisungen des Fragens •. .'
la ' ••• sondem die Intepretation des eigentlich geschichtlich Seienden auf seine Ges-

chichtlichkeit'. We shall translate the frequently occurring term 'Geschichtlichkeit' as
'historicality'. Heidegger very occasionally uses the term 'Historizitiit', as on H. 20 he1ow,
and this will he translated as 'historicity'.
3 While the terms 'ontisch' ('onticaI') and 'ontologisch' ('ontological') are not explicitly
defined, their meanings will emerge rather c1early. Ontological inquiry is concemed
primarily with Being; ontical inquiry is concerned primarily with entities and the facts
about them.

II

32

Being and Time

INT. 1

~ 4. The Ontical Priority of the Question of Being

12

Science in general may be defined as the totality established through an
interconnection of true propositions. 1 This definition is not complete, nor
does it reach the meaning of science. As ways in which man behaves,
sciences have the manner of Being which this entity-man himself- possesses. This entity we denote by the term "Dasein". Scientific research is
not the only manner of Being which this entity can have, nor is it the
one which lies closest. Moreover, Dasein itself has a special distinctiveness
as compared with other entities, and it is worth our while to bring this to
view in a provisional way. Here our discussion must anticipate later
analyses, in which our results will be authentically exhibited for the first time.
Dasein is an entity which does not just occur among other entities.
Rather it is ontically distinguished by the fact that, in its very Being,
that Being is an issue for it. But in that case, this is a constitutive state of
Dasein's Being, and this implies that Dasein, in its Being, has a relationship towards that Being-a relationship which itself is one of Being. 2 And
this means further that there is sorne way in which Dasein understands
itselfin its Being, and that to sorne degree it does so explicitly. It is peculiar to this entity that with and through its Being, this Being is disclosed
to it. Understanding of Being is itselj a definite characteristic of Dasein's Being.
Dasein is ontically distinctive in that it is ontological. 3
Here "Being-ontological" is not yet tantamount to "developing an
ontology". So ifwe should reserve the term "ontology" for that theoretical inquiry which is explicitly devoted to the meaning ofentities, then what
we have had in mind in speaking of Dasein's "Being-ontological" is to be
designated as something "pre-ontological". It does not signify simply
"being-ontical", however, but rather "being in such a way that one has
an understanding of Being".
That kind of Being towards which Dasein can comport itself in one
way or another, and always does comport itself somehow, we calI "existence" [Existenz]. And because we cannot define Dasein's essence by citing
a "what" of the kind that pertains to a subject-matter [eines sachhaltigen
Was], and because its essence lies rather in the fact that in each case it
l ' . • • das Ganze eines Begründungszusammenhanges wahrer Satze , , .' See H. 357
helow.
la 'Zu dieser Seinsverfassung des Daseins gehôrt aber dann, dass es in seinem Sein zu
diesem Sein ein Seinsverhaltnis hat.' This passage is ambiguous and might aIso be read
as: '... and this implies that Dasein, in its Being towards this Being, has a relationship of
Being.'
a'. , . dass es ontologisch ist', As 'ontologisch' may be either an adjective or an
adverb, we might aIso write: " , . that it is ontologically', A similar ambiguity occurs in
the two following sentences, where we read 'Ontologisch-sein' and 'ontisch-seiend'
respectively.

INT. 1
Being and Time
33
has its Being to be, and has it as its own,l we have chosen to designate
this entity as "Dasein", a term which is purely an expression of its Being
[als reiner Seinsausdruck].
Dasein always understands itself in terms of its existence-in terms of a
possibility of itself: to be itself or not itself. Dasein has either chosen these
possibilities itself, or got itself into them, or grown up in them already.
Only the particular Dasein decides its existence, whether it does so by
taking hold or by neglecting. The question ofexistence never gets straightened out except through existing itself. The understanding ofoneselfwhich
leads along this way we calI "existentiell". 2 The question of existence is one
of Dasein's ontical 'affairs'. This does not require that the ontological
structure of existence should be theoretically transparent. The question
about that structure aims at the analysis [Auseinanderlegung] of what
constitutes existence. The context [Zusammenhang] of such structures we
calI "existentiality". 115 analytic has the character of an understanding
which is not existentielI, but rather existential. The task of an existential
analytic of Dasein bas been delineated in Ildvance, as regards both its
possibility and its necessity, in Dasein's ontical constitution.
So far as existence is the determining character of Dasein, the ontological analytic of this entity always requires that existentiality be considered beforehand. By "existentiality" we understand the state of Being
that is constitutive for those entities that exist. But in the idea of such a
constitutive state ofBeing, the idea of Being is already included. And thus
even the possibility of carrying through the analytic ofDasein depends on
working out beforehand the question about the meaning ofBeing in general.
Sciences are ways of Being in which Dasein cornports itself towards
entities which it need not be itself. But to Dasein, Being in a world is
something that belongs essentially. Thus Dasein's understanding of Being
pertains with equal primordiality both to an understanding of something
like a 'world', and to the understanding of the Being of those entities
which become accessible within the world. a So whenever an ontology
takes for its theme entities whose character of Being is other than that of
Dasein, it has its own foundation and motivation in Dasein's own ontical
structure, in which a pre-ontological understanding of Being is comprised
as a definite characteristic.
l " , • dass es je sein Sein ais seiniges zu sein hat .. .'
la We shall translate 'existenziell' by 'existentiell', and

'existenzial' by 'existential'
There sec;ms to he litde reason for resorting to the more elaborate neologisms proposed by
other wrlters.
3 ' ••• innerhalb der Welt . , .' Heidegger uses at least three expressions which
might be translated as 'in theworld': 'innerhalb derWelt', 'in derWelt', and the adjective
(or adverb) 'innerweltlich', We shall translate these respectively by 'within the world',
'in the world', and 'within-the-world'.
B

13

14

34
Being and Time
INT. 1
Therefore fundamental ontology, from which alone aIl other ontologies
can take their rise, must be sought in the existential analytic of Dasein.
Dasein accordingly takes priority over aIl other entities in several ways.
The first priority is an ontical one: Dasein is an entity whose Being has the
determinate character of existence. The second priority is an ontological
one: Dasein is in itself'ontological', because existence is thus determinative
for it. But with equal primordiality Dasein also possesses-as constitutive
for its understanding of existence-an understanding of the Being of aIl
entities of a character other than its own. Dasein has therefore a third
priority as providing the ontico-ontological condition for the possibility
of any ontologies. Thus Dasein has turned out to be, more than any other
entity, the one which must first be interrogated ontologicaIly.
But the roots of the existential analytic, on its part, are ultimately
existentiell, that is, ontical. Only if the inquiry of philosophical research is
itself seized upon in an existentiell manner as a possibility of the Being
of each existing Dasein, does it become at aIl possible to disclose the
existentiality of existence and to undertake an adequately founded ontological problematic. But with this, the ontical priority of the question of
being has also become plain.
Dasein's ontico-ontological priority was seen quite early, though
Dasein itselfwas not grasped in its genuine ontological structure, and did
not even become a problem in which this structure was sought. Aristotle
sa<ys: ~ !fVX~ 'Tà oV'Ta 7TW, €CT'Ttv. v1 "Man's soul is, in a certain way,
entities." The 'soul' which makes up the Being of man has ata87JcTt> and
v07Jat, among its ways of Being, and in these it discovers aIl entities, both
in the fact tha t they are, and in their Being as they are-that is, always
in their Being. Aristotle's principle, which points back to the ontological
thesis of Parmenides, is one which Thomas Aquinas has taken up in a
characteristic discussion. Thomas is engaged in the task of deriving the
'transcendentia'-those characters of Being which lie beyond every possible
way in which an entity may be classified as coming under sorne generic
kind of subject-matter (every modus specialis entis), and which belong
necessarily to anything, whatever it may be. Thomas has to demonstrate
that the verum is such a transcendens. He does this by invoking an entity
which, in accordance with its very manner of Being, is properly suited
to 'come together with' entities of any sort whatever. This distinctive
entity, the ens quod natum est convenire cum omni ente, is the soul (anima).vl1
Here the priority of 'Dasein' over aIl other entities emerges, although it
has not been ontologically clarified. This priority has obviously nothing
in common with a vicious subjectivizing of the totality of entities.
By indicating Dasein's ontico-ontological priority in this provisional

INT.I

Being and Time

35

manner, we have grounded our demonstration that the question of Being
is ontico-ontologically distinctive. But when we analysed the structure of
this question as such (Section 2), we came up against a distinctive way
in which this entity functions in the very formulation of that question.
Dasein then revealed itself as that entity which must first be worked out
in an ontologically adequate manner, if the inquiry is to become a transparent one. But now it has been shown that the ontological analytic of
Dasein in general is what makes up fundamental ontology, so that Dasein
functions as that entity which in principle is to be interrogated beforehand
as to its Being.
If to Interpret the meaning of Being becomes our task, Dasein is not
only the primary entity to be interrogated; it is also that cntity which
already comports itself, in its Being, towards what we are asking about
when we ask this question. But in that case the question ofBeing is nothing
other than the radicalization of an essen~al tendency-of-Being which
belongs to Dasein itself-the pre-ontological understanding of Being.

15

II
THE TWOFOLD TASK IN WORKING OUT THE
QUESTION OF BEING. METHOD AND DESIGN OF
OUR INVESTIGATION

The Ontological Anafytic of Dasein as Laying Bare the Horizon for an
Interpretation of the Meaning of Being in General
1N designating the tasks of 'formulating' the question of Being, we have
shown not only that we must establish which entity is to serve as our
primaryobject of interrogation, but also that the right way of access to this
entity is one which we must explicidy make our own and hold secure. We
have already discussed which entity takes over the principal role within
the question ofBeing. But how are we, as it were, to set our sights towards
this entity, Dasein, both as something accessible to us and as something
to be understood and interpreted?
ln demonstrating that Dasein in ontico-ontologicaUy prior, we may
have misled the reader into supposing that this entity must also be what
is given as ontico-ontologicaUy primary not only in the sense that it can
itself be-grasped 'immediately', but also in that the kind of Being which
it possesses is presented just as 'immediately'. OnticaUy, of course, Dasein
is not only close to us-even that which is closest: we are it, each of us,
we ourselves. In spite ofthis, or rather for just this reason, it is ontologicaUy
that which is farthest. To be sure, its ownmost Being is such that it has
an understanding of that Being, and already maintains itself in each case
as if its Being has been interpreted in sorne manner. But we are certainly
not saying that when Dasein's own Being is thus interpreted pre-ontologicaUy in the way which lies closest, this interpretation can be taken over
as an appropriate clue, as ifthis way ofunderstanding Being is what must
emerge when one's ownmost state of Being is considered 1 as an ontological theme. The kind of Being which belongs to Dasein is rather such
that, in understanding its own Being, it has a tendency to do so in terms
of that entity towards which it cQmports itself proximally and in a way
which is essentially constant-in terms of the 'world'. In Dasein itself,
and therefore in its own understanding of Being, the way the world is
~ 5.

l

'Besinnung'. The earliest editiona have 'Bestimmung' inatead.

INT. II
Being and Time
37
understood is, as we shaU show, reflected back ontologically upon the way
in which Dasein itself gets interpreted.
Thus because Dasein is ontico-ontologically prior, its own specific state
of Being (if we understand this in the sense of Dasein's 'categorial
structure') remains concealed from it. Dasein is onticaUy 'closest' to itself
and ontologicaUy farthest; but pre-ontologicaUy it is surely not a stranger.
Here we have merely indicated provisionally that an Interpretation of
this entity is confronted with peculiar difficulties grounded in the kind of
Being which belongs to the object taken as our theme and to the very
behaviour of so taking it. These difficulties are not grounded in any shortcomings of the cognitive powers with which we are endowed, or in the
lack of a suitable way of conceiving-a lack which seemingly would not
be hard to remedy.
.
Not only, however, does an understanding of Being belong to Dasein;
but this understanding develops or decays along with whatever kind of
Being Dasein may possess at the time; accordingly there are many ways in
which it has been interpreted, and these are all at Dasein's (lisposal.
Dasein's ways of behaviour, its capacities, powers, possibilities, and vicissitudes, have been studied with varying extent in philosophical psychology,
in anthropology, ethics, and 'political science', in poetry, biography, and
the writingofhistory,each in a different fashion. But the question remains
whether these interpretations of Dasein have been carried through with
a primordial existentiality comparable to whatever existentiell primordiality they may have possessed. Neither of these excludes the
other but they do not necessarily go together. ExistentieU interpretation can demand an existential analytic, if indeed we conceive of
philosophical cognition as something possible and necessary. Only when
the basic structures of Dasein have been adequately worked out with
explicit orientation towards the problem of Being itself, will what we
have hitherto gained in interpreting Dasein get its existential justification.
Thus an analytic of Dasein must remain our first requirement in the
question of Being. But in that case the problem of obtaining and securing
the kind ofaccess which willlead to Dasein, becomes even more a buming
one. To put it negatively, we have no right to resort to dogmatic constructions and to apply just any idea of Being and actuality to this entity, no
matter how 'self-evident' that idea may be; nor may any of the 'categories' which such an idea prescribes be forced upon Dasein without
proper ontological consideration. We must rather choose such a way of
access and such a kind ofinterpretation that this entity can show itselfin
itself and from itself [an ihm selbst von ihm selbst her]. And this
means that it is to be shown as it is proximalfy and for the most part~

16

Being and Time
INT. II
in its average everydayness. 1 In this everydayness there are certain structures
which we shall exhibit-not just any accidentaI structures, but essential
ones which, in every kind of Being that factical Dasein may possess,
persist as determinative for the character of its Being. Thus by having
regard1for the basic state of Dasein's everydayness, we shall bring out the
Being of this entity in a preparatory fashion.
When taken in this way, the analytic ofDasein remains wholly oriented
towards the guiding task of working out the question of Being. Its limits
are thus determined. It cannot attempt to provide a complete ontology of
Dasein, which assuredly must be constructed if anything like a 'philosophical' anthropology is to have a phiiosophically adequate basis. 2
If our purpose is to make such an anthropology possible, or to lay its
ontological foundations, our Interpretation will provide only sorne of the
'pieces', even though they are by no means inessential ones. Our
analysis of Dasein, however, is not only incomplete; it is also, in the first
instance, provisional. It merely brings out the Being of this entity, without
Interpreting its meaning. It is rather a preparatory procedure by which
the horizon for the most primordial way of interpreting Being may be
laid bare. Once we have arrived at that horizon, this preparatory analytic
of Dasein will have to be repeated on a higher and authentically ontological basis.
We shall point to temporality3 as the meaning ofthe Being ofthat entity
which we calI "Dasein". If this is to be demonstrated, those structures of
Daseinwhich we shall provisionally exhibit must be Interpreted over
again as niodes oftemporality. In thus interpreting Dasein as temporality,
however, we shall not give the answer to our leading question as to the
meaning of Being in general. But the ground will have been prepared for
obtaining such an answer.
38

17

l'Und zwar soli sie das Seiende in dem zeigen, wie es zuniichst und zumeist ist, in seiner
durchschnittlichen Alltâglichkeit.' The phrase 'zunachst und zumeist' is one that occurs
many times, though Heidegger does not explain it until Section 71 (H. 370 below), where
'AlItaglichkeit' too gets explained. On 'zunachst' see our note l, p. 25, H. 6.
2 The ambiguity of the pronominal references in this sentence and the one before it,
reflects a similar ambiguity in the German. (The English-speaking reader should be
reminded that the kind of philosophical 'anthropology' which Heidegger has in mind
is a study of man in the widest sense, and is not to be confused with the empirical sciences
of 'physical' and 'cultural' anthropology.)
3 'Zeitlichkeit'. \Vhile it is tempting to translate the adjective 'zeitlich' and the noun
'Zeitlichkeit' by their most obvious English cognates, 'time1y' and 'timeliness', this would
be entire1y misleading; for 'temporal' and 'temporality' come much doser to what
Heidegger has in mind, not only when he is discussing these words in their popular
senses (as he does on the following page) but even when he is using them in his own special
sense, as in Section 65 be1ow. (See especially H. 326 below, where 'Zeitlichkeit' is defined.)
On the other hand, he occasionally uses the noun 'Temporalitat' and the adjective
'temporal' in a sense which he will explain later (H. 19). We shaH translate these by
'Temporality' and 'Tempora!', with initial capita1s.

Being and Time

INT. II

39

We have already intimated that Dasein has a pre-ontological Being as
its ontically constitutive state. Dasein is in such a way as to be sornething which understands sornething like Being. 1 Keeping this interconnection firm1y in mind, we shall show that whenever Dasein tacitly
understands and interprets something like Being, it does so with
time as its standpoint. Time must be brought to light-and genuinely
conceived-as the horizon for àlI understanding of Being and for any
way of interpreting it. In order for us to discern this, time needs to be
explicated primordially as the horizon for the understanding of Being, and in terms
of temporality as the Being of Dasein, which understands Being. This task as a
whole requires that the conception of time thus obtained shall be distinguished from the way in which it is ordinarily understood. This
ordinary way ofunderstanding it has become explicit in an interpretation
precipitated in the traditional concept of time, which has persisted from
Aristotle to Bergson and even later. Here we must make clear that this
conception of time and, in general, the ordinary way of understanding it,
have sprung from temporality, and we must show how this has come
about. Weshall thereby restore (0 the ordinary conception the autonomy
which is its rightful due, as against Bergson's thesis that the time one has
in mind in this conception is space.
'Time' has long functioned as an ontological--or rather an onticalcriterion for naïvely discriminating various realms of entities. A distinction has been made between 'temporal' entities (natural processes and
historical happehings) and 'non-temporal' entities (spatial and numerical
relationships). We are accustomed to contrasting the 'timeless' meaning
of propositions with the 'temporal' course of propositional assertions. It is
also held that there is a 'cleavage' between 'temporal' entities and the
'supra-temporal' eternal, and efforts are made to bridge this over. Here
'temporal' always ~eans simply being [seiend] 'in time'-a designation
which, admittedly, is still pretty obscure. The Fact remains that time, in
the sense of 'being [sein] in time', functions as a criterion for distinguishing
realms ofBeing. Hitherto no one has asked or troubled to investigate how
time has come to have this distinctive ontological function, or with what
right anything like time functions as such a criterion; nor has anyone
asked whether the authentic ontological relevance which is possible for
it, gets expressed when "time" is used in so naïvely ontological a manner.
'Time' has acquired this 'self-evident' ontological function' 'of its own
accord', so to speak; indeed it has done so within the horizon of the way
it is ordinarily understood. And it has maintained itself in this function
to this day.
l

'Dasein ist in der Weise, seiend 50 etwas wie Sein zu verstehen.'

18

Being and Time

40

19

INT. II

In contrast to aH this, our treatment of the question of the meaning of
Being must enable us to show that the central problematic of all onlology is
rooted in the phenomenon of time, if rightly seen and rightly explained, and we
must show how this is the case.
If Being is to be conceived in terms of time, and if, indeed, its various
modes and derivatives are to become intelligible in their respective
modifications and derivations by taking time into consideration, then
Being itself (and not merely entities, let us say, as entities 'in time') is
thus made visible in its 'temporal' character. But in that case, 'temporal'
can no longer mean simply 'being in time'. Even the 'non-temporal' and
the 'supra-temporal' are 'temporal' with regard to their Being, and not
just privatively by contrast with something 'temporal' as an entity 'in
time', but in a positive sense, though it is one which we must first explain.
In both pre-philosophical and philosophical usage the expression 'temporal' has been pre-empted by the signification we have cited; in the
following investigations, however, we shaH employ it for another signification. Thus the way in which Being and its modes and characteristics have
their meaning determined primordially in terms of time, is what we shaH
calI its " Temporal" determinateness. 1 Thus the fundamental ontological
task of Interpreting Being as such indudes working out the Temporality of
Being. In the exposition of the problematic of Temporality the question
of the meaning ofBeing will first be concretely answered.
Because Being cannot be grasped except by taking time into consideration, the answer to the question ofBeing cannot lie in any proposition that
is blind and ,Ïsolated. The answer is not properly conceived if what it
asserts proposldonally is just passed along, especiaHy if it gets circulated
as a free-floating result, so that we merely get informed about a
'standpoint' which may perhaps differ from the way this has hitherto
been treated. Whether the answer is a 'new' one remains quite superficial
and is of no importance. Its positive character must lie in its being ancient
enough for us to leam to conceive the possibilities which the 'Ancients'
have made ready for us. In its ownmost meaning this answer tells us that
concrete ontological research must begin with an investigative inquiry
which keeps within the horizon we have laid bare; and this is aH that it
tells us.
If, then, the answer to the question of Being is to provide the dues for
our research, it cannot be adequate until it brings us the insight that the
specifie kind of Being of ontology hitherto, and the vicissitudes of its
inquiries, its findings, and its failures, have been necessitated in the very
character of Dasein.
l

'seine temporale Bestimmtheit'. See our note 3, p. 38, H. 17 above.

INT. II
Being and Time
41
~ 6. The Task of Destroying the History of Ontology
AlI research-and not least that which operates within the range of the
central question of Being-is an ontical possibility of Dasein. Dasein's
Being finds its meaning in temporality. But temporality is also the condition which makes historicality possible as a temporal kind of Being
which Dasein itself possesses, regardless of whether or how Dasein is an
entity 'in time'. Historicality, as a determinate character, is prior to what
is called "history" (world-historical historizing).l
"Historicality" stands for the state of Being that is constitutive for
Dasein's 'historizing' as such; only on the basis of such 'historizing' is
anything like 'world-history' possible or can anything belong historicaHy
to world-history. In its factical Being, any Dasein is as it already was, and
it is 'what' it already was. It is its past, whether explicitly or not. And this
is so not only in that its past is, as it were, pushing itself along 'behind' it,
and that Dasein possesses what is past as a property which is still presentat-hand and which sometimes has after-effects upon it: Dasein 'is' its past
in the way of its own Being, which, to put it roughly, 'historizes' out of its
future on each occasion. 2 Whatever the way ofbeing it may have at the
time, and thus with whatever understanding of Being it may possess,
Dasein has grown up both into and in a traditional way ofinterpreting
itself: in terms ofthis it understands itselfproximally and, within a certain
range, constantly. By this understanding, the possibilities ofits Being are
disdosed and regulated. Its own past-and this always means the past of
its 'generation'-is not something which follows along after Dasein, but
something which already goes ahead of it.
This elemental historicality of Dasein may remain hidden from Dasein
itself. But there is a way by which it can be discovered and given proper
attention. Dasein can discover tradition, preserve it, and study it explicitly.
The discovery of tradition and the disdosure of what it 'transmits' and
how this is transmitted, can be taken hold of as a task in its own right. In
this way Dasein brings itself into the kind of Being which consists in
historiological inquiry and research. But historiology-or more precisely
historicity3_is possible as a kind of Being which the inquiring Dasein may
l 'weltgeschichtliches Geschehen'. While the verb 'geschc:hen' ordin~ily ~~ to
'happen', and will often be so translated, Heidegger stresses lts etymologlcal ~hlp to
'Geschichte' or 'history'. To bring out this connection, 'Ne have coined the verb 'hlStorlze',
which might be paraphrased as to 'happen in a historical way'; we shall usually translate
'geschehen' this way in contexts where history is being discussed. We trust t.h~t the re.ader
will keep in mind that such 'historizing' is characteristic of all historical entlues, and lS not
the sort of tiIing that is done primarily by historians (as 'philosophizing', for instance,
is done by philosophers). (On 'world-historical' see H. 381 ff.)
2 'Das Dasein "ist" seine Vergangenheit in der Weise seines Seins, das, roh gesagt,
jeweils aus seiner Zukunft her "geschieht".'
, "
3 'Historizitiit'. Cf. note 2, p. 31, H. 10 above.

20

Being and Time
INT. II
possess, only because historicality is a determining characteristic for
Dasein in the very basis of its Being. If this historicality remains hidden
from Dasein, and as long as it so remains, Dasein is also denied the
possibility of historiological inquiry or the discovery of history. If historiology is wanting, this is not evidence against Dasein's historicality; on
the contrary, as a deficient mode l of this state of Being, it is evidence for
it. Only because it is 'historical' can an era be unhistoriological.
On the other hand, if Dasein has seized upon its latent possibility not
only ofmaking its own existence transparent to itselfbut also ofinquiring
into the meaning of existentiality itself (that is to say, of previously
inquiring into the meaning of Being in general), and if by such inquiry
its eyes have been opened to its own essential historicality, then one cannot
fail to see that the inquiry into Being (the ontico-ontological necessity of
which we have already indicated) is itself characterized by historicality.
The ownmost meaning of Being which belongs to the inquiry into Being
as an historical inquiry, gives us the assignment [Anweisung] ofinquiring
into the history of that inquiry itself, that is, of becoming historiological.
In working out the question of Being, we must heed this assignment, so
that by positively making the past our own, we may bring ourselves into
full possession of the ownmost possibilities of such inquiry. The question
of the meaning of Being must be carried through by explicating Dasein
beforehand in its temporality and historicality; the question thus brings
itself to the point where it understands itself as historiological.
Our preparatory Interpretation of the fundamental structures of
Dasein with regard to the average kind of Being which is closest to it
(a kind of Being -f]J. which it is therefore proximally historical as weIl),
will make manifest, however, not only that Dasein is inclined to fall back
upon its world (the world in which it is) and to interpret itselfin terms of
that world by its reflected light, but also that Dasein simultaneously falls
prey to the tradition of which it has more or less explicitly taken hold. ll
This tradition keeps it from providing its own guidance, whether in
42

21

l 'defizienter Modus'. Heidegger likes to think of certain characteristics as occurring
in various.ways or 'mode:'" among which may be included certain ways of'not occurring'
?r 'occurrmg only to. an .madequate extent' or, in general, occurring 'deficiently'. It is as
If ~ero and ~h.e n~gatlve mtegers were to be thought of as representing 'deficient modes of
bemg a posItive mteger'.
2 ' ••• das Dasei.n hat ni~ht nur die Geneigtheit, an seine Welt, in der es ist, zu verfallen
and rel~zent aus Ihr her slch auszulegen, Dasein verfiillt in eins damit auch seiner mehr
oder mmder ausdrücklich ergriffenen Tradition.' The verb 'verfallen' is one which
Heidegger will ~e many ~mes: Though we shall usually translate it simply as 'fall', it
has the ~onnotatlOn ::>r detet:lora.tmg, colla~sing, or falling down. Neither our 'fall back upon'
nor our falls prey to IS qUite nght: but fall upon' and 'fall on to' which are more literai
would be misleading for 'an •.. zu verfallen'; and though 'falls to ~he lot of' and 'devolv~
upon' would do weil for 'verfâllt' with the dative in other contexts, they will not do 50
weil here.

Being and Time
43
inquiring or in choosing. This holds true-and by no means least-for that
understanding which is rooted in Dasein's ownmost Being, and for the
possibility of developing it-namely, for ontological understanding.
When tradition thus becomes master, it does so in such a way that what
it 'transmits' is made so inaccessible, proximally and for the most part,
that it rather becomes concealed. Tradition takes what has come down to
us and delivers it over to self-evidence; it blocks our access to those
primordial 'sources' from which the categories and concepts handed down
to us have been in part quite genuinely drawn. l Indeed it makes us forget
that they have had such an origin, and makes us suppose that the necessity of going back to these sources is something which we need not even
understand. Dasein has had its historicality so thoroughly uprooted by
tradition that it confines its interest to the multiformity of possible types,
directions, and standpoints of philosophical activity in the most exotic
and alien of cultures; and by this very interest it seeks to veil the fact that
it has no ground of its own to stand on. Consequently, despite aIl its
historiological interests and aIl its zeal for an Interpretation which is
phiiologically 'objective' ["sachliche"], Dasein no longer understands the
most elementary conditions which would alone enable it to go back to
the past in a positive manner and make it productively its own.
We have shown at the outset (Section 1) not only that the question of
the meaning of Being is one that has not been attended to and one that
has been inadequately formulated, but that it has become quite forgotten
in spite of aIl our interest in 'metaphysics'. Greek ontology and its history
-which, in their numerous filiations and distortions, determine the conceptuai character' of philosophy even today-prove that when Dasein
understands either itself or Being in general, it does so in terms of the
'world', and that the ontology which has thus arisen has deteriorated
[verfaIlt] to a tradition in which it gets reduced to something self-evident
-merely material for reworking, as it was for Hegel. In the Middle Ages
this uprooted Greek ontology became a fixed body of doctrine. Its systematics, however, is by no means a mere joining together of traditional
pieces into a single edifice. Though its basic conceptions of Being have
been taken over dogrnatically from the Greeks, a great deal of unpretentious work has been carried on further within these limits. With the
peculiar character which the Scholastics gave it, Greek ontology has, in
its essentials, travelled the path that leads through the Disputationes metaphysicae of Suarez to the 'metaphysics' and transcendental philosophy,of
modern times, determining even the foundations and the aims of Hegel's

INT. II

1 In this passage~Heidegger juxtaposes a number of words beginning with the prefix
'über-'; 'übergibt' ('transmits'); 'überantwortet' ('delivers over'); 'das Oberkommene'
('what has come down to us'); 'überlieferten' ('handed down to us').

22

23

44
Being and Time
INT. II
'logic'. In the course of this history certain distinctive domains of Being
have come into view and have served as the primary guides for subsequent
problematics: the ego cogito of Descartes, the subject, the "1", reason,
spirit, person. But these aIl remain uninterrogated as to their Being and
its structure, in accordance with the thoroughgoing way in which the
question of Being has been neglected. It is rather the case that the categorial content of the traditional ontology has been carried over to these
entities with corresponding formalizations and purely negative restrictions, or else dialectic has been called in for the purpose of Interpreting
the substantiality of the subject ontologicaIly.
If the question of Being is to have its own history made transparent,
then this hardened tradition must be loosened up, and the concealments
which it has brought aboutl must be dissolved. We understand this task
as one in which by taking the question of Being as our clue, we are to, destroy
the traditional content of ancient ontology until we arrive at those primordial experiences in which we achieved our first ways of determining the
nature of Being-the ways which have guided us ever since.
ln thus demonstrating the origin of our basic ontological concepts by
an investigation in which their 'birth certificate' is displayed, we have
nothing to do with a vicious relativizing of ontological standpoints. But
this destruction is just as far from having the negative sense of shaking off
the ontological tradition. We must, on the contrary, stake out the positive
possibilities of that tradition, and this always means keeping it within its
limits; these in turn are given factically in the way the question is formulated at the time, and in the way the possible field for investigation is
thus bounded off. On its negative side, this destruction does not relate
itselftowards the past;'itS criticism is aimed at 'today' and at the prevalent
way of treating the history of ontology, whether it is headed towards
doxography, towards intellectual history, or towards a history ofproblems.
But to bury the past in nullity [Nichtigkeit] is not the purpose of this
destruction; its aim is positive; its negative function remains unexpressed
and indirect.
The destruction of the history of ontology is essentiaIly bound up with
the way the question of Being is formulated, and it is possible ooly within
such a formulation. In the frameworkofour treatise, whichaimsat working
out that question in principle, we can carry out this destruction only with
regard to stages of that history which are in principle decisive.
In line with the positive tendencies of this destruction, we must in
the first instance raise the question whether and to what extent the
l '. . " der durch sie gezeitigten Verdeckungen.' The verb 'zeitigen' will appear frequently In later chapters, See H. 304 and our note ad loc.

INT. II

Being and Time
45
Interpretation ofBeing and the phenomenon of time have been brought
together thematically in the course of the history ofontology, and whether
the problematic of Temporality required for this has ever been worked
out in principle or ever could have been. The first and ooly person who
has gone any stretch of the way towards investigating the dimension of
Temporality or has even let himself be drawn hither by the coercion of
the phenomena themselves is Kant. Ooly when we have established the
problematic of Temporality, can we succeed in casting light on the
obscurity of his doctrine of the schematism. But this will also show us
why this area is one which had to remain closed off to him in its real
dimensions and its central ontological function. Kant himself was aware
that he was venturing into an area of obscurity: 'This schematism of our
understanding as regards appearances and their mere forro is an art
hidden in the depths of the human soul, the true devices of which are
hardly ever to be divined from Nature and laid uncovered before our
eyes.'! Here Kant shrinks back, as it were, in the face of something which
must be brought to light as a theme and a principle if the expression
"Being" is to have any demonstrable meaning. In the end, those very
phenomena which will be exhibited under the heading of 'Temporality'
in our analysis, are precisely those most covert judgments of the 'common
reason' for which Kant says it is the 'business of philosophers' to provide
an analytic.
In pursuing this task ofdestruction with the problematic ofTemporality
as our clue, we shaIl try to Interpret the chapter on the schematism and
the Kantian doctrine of time, taking that chapter as our point of departure. At the same time we shall show why Kant could never achieve an
insight into the problematic of Temporality. There were two things that
stood in his way: in the first place, he altogether neglected the problem
of Being; and, in connection with this, he failed to provide an ontology
with Dasein as its theme or (to put this in Kantian language) to give a
preliminary ontological analytic of the subjectivity of the subject. Instead
of this, Kant took over Descartes' position quite dogmaticaIly, notwithstanding aIl the essential respects in which he had gone beyond him.
Furthermore, in spite of the fact that he was'bringing the phenomenon
of time back into the subject again, his analysis of it remained oriented
towards the traditional way in which time had been ordinarily understood; in the long run this kept him from working out the phenomenon
of a 'transcendental determination of time' in its own structure and function. Because of this double effect of tradition the decisive connection
between time and the '1 think' was shrouded in utter darkness; it did not
even become a problem.

24

46

25

Being and Time
INT. Il
In taking over Descartes' ontological position Kant made an essential
omission: he failed to provide an ontology of Dasein. This omission was
a decisive one in the spirit [im Sinne] of Descartes' ownmost Tendencies.
With the 'cogito sum' Descartes had claimed that he was putting philosophy on a new and firm footing. But what he left undetermined when he
began in this 'radical' way, was the kind of Being which belongs to the
res cogitans, or-more precisely-the meaning of the Being of the 'sum'.l By
working out the unexpressed ontological foundations of the 'cogito sum', we
shall complete our sojoum at the second station along the path of our
destructive retrospect of the history of ontology. Our Interpretation will
not only prove that Descartes had to neglect the question of Being altogether; it will also show why he came to suppose that the absolute 'Beingcertain' ["Gewisssein"] of the cogito exempted him from raising the question of the meaning of the Being which this entity possesses.
Yet Descartes not only continued to neglect this and thus to accept a
completely indefinite ontological status for the res cogitans sive mens sive
animus ['the thing which cognizes, whether it be a mind or spirit']: he
regarded this entity as afundamentum inconcussum, and applied the medieval
ontology to it in carrying through the fundamental considerations of his
Meditationes. He defined the res cogitans ontologically as an ens; and in the
medieval ontology the meaning of Being for such an ens had been fixed
by understanding it as an ens ereatum. God, as ens infinitum, was the ens
in, r e a t u m. But createdness [Geschaffenheit] in the widest sense of
something's having been produced [Hergestelltheit], was an essential
item in the structure of the ancient conception of Being. The seemingly
new beginning which Descartes proposed for philosophizing has revealed
itself as the implantatio}l .of a baleful prejudice, which has kept later
generations from making any thematic ontological analytic of the 'mind'
["Gemütes"] such as would take the question of Being as a clue and
would at the same time come to grips critically with the traditional
ancient ontology.
Everyone who is acquainted with the middle ages sees that Descartes is
'dependent' upon medieval scholasticism and employs its terminology.
But with this 'discovhy' nothing is achieved philosophically as long as it
remains obscure to what a profound extent the medieval ontology has
in~uenced the way in which posterity has determined or failed to determine the ontological character of the res cogitans. The full extent of this
cannot be estimated until both the meaning and the limitations of the
ancient ontology have been exhibited in terms of an orientation directed
1 We foUow the later editions in reading 'der Seinssinn des "sum" '. The earlier editions
have an anacoluthic 'den' for 'der'.

INT. Il

Being and Time
47
towards the question of Being. In other words, in our process of destruction we find ourselves faced with the task of Interpreting the basis of the
ancient ontology in the light of the problematic of Temporality. When
this is done, it will be manifest that the ancient way of interpreting the
Being of entities is oriented towards the 'world' or 'Nature' in the widest
sense, and that it is indeed in terms of 'time' that its understanding of
Being is obtained. The outward evidence for this (though of course it is
mere!y outward evidence) is the treatment of the meaning of Being as
Trapovala or avala, which signifies, in ontologico-Temporal terms,
'presence' ["Anwesenheit"].l Entities are grasped in their Being as 'presence'; this means that they are understood with regard to a definite mode
of time-the 'Present'!
The problematic of Greek ontology, like that of any other, must take
its clues from Dasein itself. In both ordinary and philosophical usage,
Dasein, man's Being, is 'defined' as the '<poP '\oyoP ËXov--as that living
thing whose Being is essentially determined by the potentiality for discourse. 3 MYEtP is the clue for arriving at those structures of Being which
belong to the entities we encounter in addressing ourselves to anything
or speaking about it [im Ansprechen und Besprechen]. (Cf. Section 7 B.)
This is why the ancient ontology as developed by Plato tums into 'dialectic'. As the ontological clue gets progressively worked out-namely, in
the 'hermeneutic' of the '\oyos-it becomes increasingly possible to grasp
the problem ofBeing in a more radical fashion. The 'dialectic', which has
been a genuine philosophical embarrassment, becomes superfiuous. That
1 The noun oVala is derived from one of the stems used in conjugating the irregular
verb €lva.., ('to be'); in the Aristotelian tradition it is usually translated as 'substance',
though translators of Plato are more likely to write 'essence', 'existence', or 'being'.
Heidegger suggests that ovula is to be thought of as synonymous with the derivative
noun 1Tapovula ('being-at', 'presence'). As he points out, 1Tapovula has a close
etymological correspondence with the German 'Anwesenheit', which is similarly derived
from the stem of a verb meaning 'to be' (Cf. O.H.G. 'wesan') and a prefix of the place
or time at which ('an-'). We shaU in general translate 'Anwesenheit' as 'presence', and
the participle 'anwesend' as some form of the expression 'have presence'.
2 'die "Gegenwart" '. While this noun may, like 1Tapovula or 'Anwesenheit', mean the
presence of someone at some place or on some occasion, it more often means the present, as
distinguished from the past and the future. In its etymological root-structure, however, it
means a waiting-towards. While Heidegger seems to think of aU these meanings as somehow
fused, we shaU generally translate this noun as 'the Present', reserving 'in the present' for
the corresponding adjective 'gegenwiirtig'.
3 The phrase 'q;ov Ao"ov €XOv is traditionally translated as 'rational animal', on the
assumption that Ao"o. refers to the faculty of reason. Heidegger, however, points out that
Ao"o. is derived from the same root as the verb M"nv ('to talk', 'to hold discourse');
he identifies this in turn with VO€,v ('to cognize', 'ta he aware of', 'to know'), and calls
attention to the fact that the same stem is found in the adjective Il,aÀ€KT'KO. ('dialectical').
(See also H. 165 below.) He thus interprets Ao"o. as 'Rede', which we shaU usually
translate as 'discourse' or 'talk', depending on the context. See Section 7 B below (H.
32 ff.) and Sections 34 and 35, where 'Rede' will be defined and distinguished both from
'Sprache' ('language') and from 'Gerede' ('idle talk') (H. 160 ff.).

26

48
Being and Time
INT. II
is why Aristotle 'no longer has any understanding' of it, for he has put it
on a more radical footing and raised it to a new level [aufhob]. MYE'V
itself--or rather voEÎv, that simple awareness of something present-atband in its sheer presence-at-hand, l which Parmenides had already taken
to guide him in bis own interpretation of Being-has the Temporal
structure of a pure 'making-present' of something. ll Those entities which
show themselves in this and for it, and which are understood as entities
in the most authentic sense, thus get interpreted with regard to the
Present; that is, they are conceived as presence (ovO'la).3
Yet the Greeks have managed to interpret Being in tbis way without
any explicit knowledge of the dues which function here, without any
acquaintance with the fundamental ontological function of rime or even
any understanding of it, and without any insight into the reason why this
function is possible. On the contrary, they take time itself as one entity
among other entities, and try to grasp it in the structure of its Being,
though that way of understanding Being which they have taken as their
horizon is one which is itself naïvely and inexplicitly oriented towards
time.
Within the framework in which we are about to work out the principles
of the question of Being,we cannot present a detailed Temporal Interpretation of the foundations of ancient ontology, particularly not of its
loftiest and purest scientific stage, which is reached in Aristotle. Instead
we shall give an interpretation of Aristotle's essay on rime,11 which may
be chos~ as providing a way of discriminating the basis and the limitations
of the ancient science of Being.
Aristotle's essay on rime is the first detailed Interpretation of this
1'. • • von etwas Vorhandenem in seiner puren Vorhandenheit .. .' The adjective
'vorhanden' means literally 'betorGthe hand', but this signification has long since given
way to others. In ordinary German usage it may, for instance, be applied to the stock of
goods which a dealer has 'on hand', or to the 'extant' works of an author; and in earlier
philosophical writing it could he used, like the word 'Dasein' itself, as a synonym for the
Latin 'existentia'. Heidegger, however, distinguishes quite sharply between 'Dasein' and
'Vorhandenheit', using the latter to designate a kind of Heing which belongs to things
other than Dasein. We shall translate 'vorhanden' as 'present-at-hand', and 'Vorhandenheit' as 'presence-at-hand'. The reader must be careful not to confuse these expressions
with our 'presence' ('Anwesenheit') and 'the Present' ('die Gegenwart'), etc., or with a
few other verbs~d adjectives which we may find it convenient to translate by 'present'.
2 ' ••• des reinen "Gegenwiirtigens" von etwas'. The verb 'gegenwiirtigen', which is
derived from the adjective 'gegenwiirtig', is not a normal German verb, but was used by
Husserl and is used extensively by Heidegger. While we shall translate it by various forms
of 'make present', it does not necessarily mean 'making physically present', but often
means something like 'bringing vividly to mind'.
a 'Das Seiende, das sich in ihm für es zeigt und das ais das eigentliche Seiende
verstanden wird, erhlilt demnach seine Auslegung in Rücksicht auf-Gegen-wart,
d.h. es ist ais Anwesenheit (allata) begriffen.' The hyphenation of 'Gegen-wart' calls
attention to the structure of this word in a way which cannot he reproduced in English.
See note 2, p. 47, H. 25 above. The pronouns 'ihm' and 'es' presumably both refer back
to Mynv, though their reference is ambiguous, as our version suggests.

INT. II

Being and Time
49
phenomenon which has come down to us. Every subsequent account of
rime, induding Bergson's, has been essentially determined by it. When we
analyse the Aristotelian conception, it willlikewise become dear, as we
go back, that the Kantian account of time operates within the structures
which Aristotle has set forth; this means that Kant's basic ontological
orientation remains that ofthe Greeks, in spite ofall the distinctions which
arise in a new inquiry.
The question of Being does not achieve its true concreteness until we
have carried through the process of destroying the ontological tradition.
ln this way we can fully prove that the question of the meaning of Being
is one that we cannot avoid, and we can demonstrate what it means to
talk about 'restating' this question.
ln any investigation in this field, where 'the thing itself is deeply
veiled'111 one must take pains not to overestimate the results. For in
such an inquiry one is constantly compelled to face the possibility
of disdosing an even more primordial and more universal horizon
from which we may draw the answer to the question, "What is
'Being'-?" We can discuss such possibilities seriously and with positive
results only if the question of Being has been reawakened and we have
arrived at a field where we can come to terms with it in a way that can
be controlled.
~ 7· The Phenomenological Method of Investigation

ln provisionally characterizing the object which serves as the theme of
our investigation (the Being ofentities, or the meaning ofBeing in general),
it seems that we have also delineated the method to be employed. The task
of ontology is to explain Being itself and to make the Being of entities
stand out in full relief. And the method of ontology remains questionable
in the highest degree as long as we merely consult those ontologies which
have come down to us historically, or other essays of that character. Since the
term "ontology" is used in this investigation in a sense which is formally
broad, any attempt to clarify the method of ontology by tracing its history
is automatically ruled out.
When, moreover, we use the term "ontology", we are not talking about
some definite philosophical discipline standing in interconnection with
the others. Here one does not have to measure up to the tasks of some
discipline that has been presented beforehand; on the contrary, only in
terms of the objective necessities of definite questions and the kind of
treatment which the 'things themselves' require, can one develop such a
discipline.
With the question of the meaning of Being, our investigation comes up

27

50

28

Being and Time

INT. II

against the fundamental question ofphilosophy. This is one that must be
treated phenomenologically. Thus our treatise does not subscribe to a 'stand}Joint' or represent any special 'direction'; for phenomenology is nothing
of either sort, nor can it become so as long as it understands itself. The
expression 'phenomenology' signifies primarily a methodological conception. This expression does not characterize the wh a t of the objects of
philosophical research as subject-matter, but rather the how of that
research. The more genuinely a methodological concept is worked out
and the more comprehensively it determines the principles on which a
science is to be conducted, aIl the more primordially is it rooted in the way
we come to terms with the things themselves, l and the farther is it
removed from what we calI "technical devices", though there are many
5uch devices even in the theoretical disciplines.
Thus the term 'phenomenology' expresses a maxim which can be formulated as 'To the things themselves!' It is opposed to aIl free-floating
constructions and accidentaI findings; it is opposed to taking over any
conceptions which only seem to have been demonstrated; it is opposed
to those pseudo-questions which parade themselves as 'problems', often
for generations at a time. Yet this maxim, one may rejoin, is abundantly
self-evident, and it expresses, moreover, the underlying principle of any
scientific knowledge whatsoever. Why should anything so self-evident be
taken up explicitly in giving a title to a branch of research? In point of
fact, the issue here is a kind of 'self-evidence' which we should like to
bring doser to us, so far as it is important to do so in casting light upon
the procedure of our treatise. We shall expound only the preliminary
conception [VorbegriffJ of phenomenology.
This expression has two components: "phenomenon" and "logos".
Both of these go back to térms fr.pm the Greek: efJaw6fL€voV and À6yoS'.
Taken superficiaIly, the term "phenomenology" is formed like "theology",
"biology", "sociology"-names which may be translated as "science of
God", "science of life", "science of society". This would make phenomenology the science of phenomena. We shall set forth the preliminary conception ofphenomenology by characterizing what one has in mind in the
term's two components, 'phenomenon' and 'logos', and by establishing
the meaning of the na~e in which these are put together. The history of
1 The appeal to the 'Sachen selbst', which Heidegger presents as virtually a slogan for
Husserl's phenomenology, is not easy to translate without giving misleading impressions.
What Husserl has in mind is the 'things' that words may be found to signify when their
significations are correctly intuited by the right kind of Anschauung. (Cf. his Logische
Untersuchungen, vol. 2, part " second edition, Halle, '9'3, p. 6.) We have followed Marvin
Farber in adopting 'the things themselves'. (Cf. his The Foundation of Phenomenology,
Cambridge, Mass., '943, pp. 202-3.) The word 'Sache' will, of course, be translated in
other ways also.

INT. II
Being and Time
51
the word itself, which presumably arose in the Wolffian school, is here of
no significance.
A. The Concept of Phenomenon
The Greek expression efJaw6fL€VoV, to which the term 'phenomenon'
goes back, is derived from the verb efJalvw8at, which signifies "to show
itself". Thus efJatv6fL€VOV means that which shows itself, the manifest [das,
was sich zeigt, das Sichzeigende, das OffenbareJ. efJalvw8at itself is a
middle-voiced form which cornes from efJalvw-to bring to the light of
day, to put in the light. epalvw cornes from the stem efJa-, like efJwS', the
light, that which is bright-in other words, that wherein something can
become manifest, visible in itself. Thuswe must keep in mind that the expression 'phenomenon' signifies that which shows itself in itself, the manifest.
Accordingly the efJaw6fL€va or 'phenomena' are the totality of what lies
in the light of day or can be brought to the light-what the Greeks sometimes identified simply with Tà oVTa (entities). Now an entity can show
itself from itself [von ihm selbst herJ in many ways, depending in each
case on the kind of access we have to it. Indeed it is even possible for an
entity to show itself as something which in itself it is not. When it shows
itself in this way, it 'looks like something or other' ["sieht" ... "so aus
wie ..."J. This kind ofshowing-itselfis what we calI "seeming" [ScheinenJ.
Thus in Greek too the expression efJatv6fL€VoV ("phenomenon") signifies
that which looks like something, that which is 'semblant', 'semblance'
[das "Scheinbare", der "Schein"J. epaw6fL€VoV àya86v means something good which looks like, but 'in actuality' is not, what it gives itself
out to be. If we are ta have any further understanding of the concept of
phenomenon, everything depends on our seeing how what is designated
in the first signification of efJatv6fL€VOV ('phenomenon' as that which shows
itself) and what is designated in the second ('phenomenon' as semblance)
are structurally interconnected. Only when the meaning of something is
such that it makes a pretension ofshowing itself-that is, of being a phenomenon-can it show itself as something which it is not; only then can it
'merely look like so-and-so'. When efJaw6fL€VOV signifies 'semblance', the
primordial signification (the phenomenon as the manifest) is already
induded as that upon which the second signification is founded. We shaH
allot the term 'phenomenon' to this positive and primordial signification
of efJaw6fL€Vov, and distinguish "phenomenon" from "semblance", which
is the privative modification of "phenomenon" as thus defined. But what
both these terms express has proximally nothing at aIl to do with what is
called an 'appearance'. or stilIless a 'mere appearance'.l
l ' • • • was man "Erscheinung" oder gar "blosse Erscheinung" nennt.' Though the
noun 'Erscheinung' and the verb 'erscheinen' behave so much like the English 'appearance' and 'appear' that the ensuing discussion presents relatively few difficulties in this

29

52

Being and Time

INT. II

This is what one is talking about when one speaks of the 'symptoms of
a disease' ["Krankheitserscheinungen"]. Here one has in mind certain
occurrences in the body which show themselves and which, in showing
themselves a s thus showing themselves, 'indicate' ["indizieren"] something which does not show itself. The emergence [Auftreten] of such
occurrences, their showing-themselves, goes together with the Beingpresent-at-hand of disturbances which do not show themselves. Thus
appearance, as the appearance 'of something', does not mean showingitselfj it means rather the announcing-itself by [von] something which
does not show itself, but which announces itself through something which
does show itself. Appearing is a not-showing-itself. But the 'not' we find
here is by no means to be confused with the privative "not" which we
used in defining the structure of semblance. 1 What appears does not show
itselfj and anything which thus fails to show itself, is also something which
can never seem. 2 AIl indications, presentations, symptoms, and symbols
have this basic formaI structure of appearing, even though they differ
among themselves.
respect for the translator, the passage shows sorne signs of hasty constructiClD, and a few
comments may be helpfuI. We are told severa! times that 'appearance' and 'phenomenon' are to be sharply distinguished; yet we are also reminded that there is a sense in
which they coincide, and even this sense seems to be twofold, though it is not clear that
Heidegger is fully aware of this. The whole discussion is based upon two further distinctions: the distinction between 'showing' ('zeigen') and 'announcing' ('melden') and
'bringing forth' ('hervorbringen'), and the distinction between ('x') that which 'shows
itself' ('das Sichzeigende') or which 'does the announcing' ('das Meldende') or which
'gets brought forth' ('das Hervorgebrachte'), and (Y') that which 'announces itself'
('das Sichmeldende') or which does the bringing-forth. Heidegger is thus able to introduce the fol1owing senses of 'Erscheinung' or 'appearance':
la. an observable eventy, such as a symptom whi~ announces a disease x by showing
itself, and in or through which x announces itselfwithout showing itself;
1b. y's showing-itself;
,
2.
x's announcing-itself in or through y;
3a. the 'mere appearance' y which x may /;ring fOTlh when x is of such a kind that its
real nature can ntver be made manifest;
3b. the 'mere appearance' which is the bringing-forlh of a 'mere appearance' in sense 3a.
Heidegger makes abundantly clear that sense 2 is the proper sense of 'appearance' and
that senses 3a and 3b are the proper senses of 'mere appearance'. On H. 30 and 31 he
concedes that sense lb corresponds to the primordial sense of 'phenomenon'; but his
discussion on H. 28 suggests that la corresponds to this more accurately, and he reverts
to this position towards the end ofH. 30.
l ' . • • ais welches es die Struktur des Scheins bestimmt.' (The oider editions omit
the 'es'.)
2 'Was sich in der Weise nicht zeigt, wie das Erscheinende, kann auch nie scheinen.'
This passage is ambiguous, but presumably 'das Erscheinende' is to be interpreted as the
x of our note l, p. 51, not oury. The reader should notice that our standardized translation of 'scheinen' as 'seem' is one which her~ becomes rather misleading, even though
these words correspond fairly weIl in ordinary usage. In distinguishing between 'scheinen'
and 'erscheinen', Heidegger seems to be insisting that 'scheinen' can be done only by
the y which 'shows itself' or 'does the announcing', not by the x which 'announces
itself' in or throughy, even though German usage does not differentiate these verbs quite
so sharply.

INT. II

Being and Time
53
In spite of the fact that 'appearing' is never a showing-itselfin the sense
of "phenomenon", appearing is possible only by reason of a showing-itself
of something. But this showing-itself, which helps to make possible the
appearing, is not the appearing itself. Appearing is an announcing-itself [das
Sich-melden] through something that shows itself. Ifone then says that with
the word 'appearance' we allude to something wherein something appears
without being itself an appearance, one has not thereby defined the
concept of phenomenon: one has rather presupposed it. This presupposition,
however, remains concealedj for when one says this sort of thing about
'appearance', the expression 'appear' gets used in two ways. "That
wherein something 'appears' " means that wherein something announces
itself, and therefore does not show itself; and in the words [Rede] 'without
being itself an "appearance" " "appearance" signifies the showing-itself.
But this showing-itself belongs essentially to the 'wherein' in which something announcesitself. According to this, phenomena are never appearances,
though on the other hand every appearance is dependent on phenomena.
Ifone defines "phenomenon" with the aid ofa conception of'appearance'
which is still unclear, then everything is stood on its head, and a 'critique'
of phenomenology on this basis is surely a remarkable undertaking.
So again the expression 'appearance' itself can have a double signification: first, appearing, in the sense of announcing-itself, as not-showingitselfj and next, that which does the announcing [das Meldende selbst]that which in its showing-itself indicates something which does not show
itself. And finally one can use "appearing" as a term for the genuine
sense of "phenomenon" as showing-itself. If one designates these three
different things as 'appearance', bewilderment is unavoidable.
But this bewilderment is essentially increased by the fact that 'appearance' can take on still another signification. That which does the announcing-that which, in its showing-itself, indicates something non-manifestmay be taken as that which emerges in what is itself non-rnanifest, and
which emanates [ausstrahlt] from it in such a way indeed that the nonrnanifest gets thought of as something that is essentially never manifest.
When that which does the announcing is taken this way, "appearance"
is tantamount to a "bringing forth" or "something brought forth", but
something which does not rnake up the real Being ofwhat brings it forth:
here we have an appearance in the sense of 'mere appearance'. That
which does the announcing and is brought forth does, ofcourse, show itself,
and in such a way that, as an emanation of what it announces, it keeps
this very thing constantly veiled in itself. On the other hand, this notshowing which veils is not a semblance. Kant uses the term "appearance"
in this twofold way. According to him "appearances" are, in the first

30

54

31

Being and Time

INT. II

place, the 'objects of empirical intuition': they are what shows itself in
such intuition. But what thus shows itself (the "phenomenon" in the
genuine primordial sense) is at the same time an 'appearance' as an
emanation of something which hides itself in that appearance-an emanation which announces.
ln so far as a phenomenon is constitutive for 'appearance' in the signi-"
fication ofannouncing itselfthrough something which shows itself, though
such a phenomenon can privatively take the variant form of semblance,
appearance too can become mere semblance. In a certain kind oflighting
someone can look as if his cheeks were flushed with red; and the redness
which shows itself can be taken as an announcement of the Being-presentat-hand of a fever, which in turn indicates sorne disturbance in the
organism.
"Phenomenon", the showing-itself-in-itself, signifies a distinctive way in
which something can be encountered. 1 "Appearance", on the other hand,
means a reference-relationship which i s in an entity itself, 2 and which
is such that what does the riferring (or the announcing) can fulfil its possible
function only if it shows itself in itself and is thus a 'phenomenon'. Both
appearance and semblance are founded upon the phenomenon, though in
different ways. The bewildering multiplicity of 'phenomena' designated
by the words "phenomenon", "semblance", "appearance", "mere appearance", cannot be disentangled unless the concept of the phenomenon is
understood from the beginning as that which shows itself in itself.
If in taking the concept of "phenomenon" this way, we leave indefinite
which entities we consider as "phenomena", and leave it open whether
what shows itselfis an entity or rather sorne characteristic which an entity
may have in its Being, then we have merely arrived at thejormal conception of "phenomenon". If by ""tha~ which shows itself" we understand
those entities which are accessible throilgh the empirical "intuition" in,
let us say, Kant's sense, then the formaI conception of "phenomenon"
will indeed be legitimately employed. In this usage "phenomenon" has
the signification of the ordinary conception of phenomenon. But this
ordinary conception is not the phenomenological conception~ If we keep
within the horizon of the Kantian problematic, we can give an illustration
of what is conceived phenomenologicaUy as a "phenomenon", with
reservations as to other differences; for we may then say that that which
already shows itself in the appearance as prior to the "phenomenon" as
\

l ' • . . eine ausgezeichnete Begegnisart von etwas.' The noun 'Begegnis' is derived from

the verb 'begegnen', which is discussed in note 2, p. 70, H. 44 below.
2 ' ••• einen seienden Verweisungsbezug im Seienden selbst .•.' The verb 'verweisen',
which we shaH translate as 'refer' or 'assign', depending upon the context, will receive
further attention in Section 17 below. See also our note 2, p. 97, H. 68 below.

INT. II

Being and Time

55

ordinarily understood and as accompanying it in every case, can, even
though it thus shows itself unthematicaUy, be brought thematicaUy to
show itself; and what thus shows itselfin itself (the 'forms of the intuition')
will be the "phenomena" of phenomenoiogy. For manifestly space and
time must be able to show themselves in this way-they must be able to
become phenomena-if Kant is claiming to make a transcendental
assertion grounded in the facts when he says that space is the a priori
"inside-which" ofan ordering. 1
If, however, the phenomenological conception of phenomenon is
to be understood at aU, regardless of how much closer we may come
to determining the nature of that which shows itself, this presupposes
inevitably that we must have an insight into the meaning of the formaI
conception of phenomenon and its legitimate employment in an
ordinary signification.-But before setting up our preliminary conception of phenomenology, we must aIse>, define the signification of
À6yos so as to make clear in what sense phenomenology can be a 'science
of' phenomena at aIl.
B.

The Concept of the Logos

ln Plato and Aristotle the concept of the Àoyos has many competing
significations, with no basic signification positively taking the lead. In
fact, however, this is only a semblance, which will maintain itself as long
as our Interpretation is unable to grasp the basic signification properly in
its primary content. If we say that the basic signification of Àoyos is
"discourse", 2 then this word-for-word translation will not be validated
until we have determined what is me3.nt by "discourse" itself. The real
signification of "discourse", which is obvious enough, gets cQr.stantly
covered up by the later history of the word Àoyos, and especially by the
numerous and arbitrary Interpretations which subsequent philosophy has
provided. Aoyos gets 'translated' (and this means that it is always getting
interpreted) as "reason", "judgment", "concept", "definition", "ground",
or "relationship". 3 But how can 'discourse' be so susceptible of modification that Àoyos can signify aU the things we have listed, and in good
scholarly usage? Even if Àoyos is understood in the sense of "assertion",
but of "assertion" as 'judgment', this seemingly legitimate translation may
still miss the fundamental signification, especially if "judgment" is conceived in a sense taken over from sorne contemporary 'theory ofjudgment'.
Aoyos does not mean "judgment", and it certainly does not mean this
1 Cf. Critique ofPure Reason2 , 'Transcendental Aesthetic', Section l, p. 340.
2 On .\0)'0., 'Rede', etc., see note 3, p. 47, H. 25 above.

3 ' ••• Vernunft, Urteil, Begriff, Definition, Grund, Verhaltnis.'

32

33

56
Being and Time
INT. II
primarily-if one understands by ''judgment'' a way of 'binding' something with something else, or the 'taking of a stand' (whether by
acceptance or by rejection).
A6yoS" as "discourse" means~_rather the same as ST)Àovv: to make
manifest what one is 'talking about' in one's discourse. 1 Aristotle has
explicated this function of discourse more precisely as à7To</>atv€u8a,.1v
The À6yoS" lets something be seen (</>atv€u8a,), namely, what the discourse is about; and it does so either for the one who is doing the talking
(the medium) or for persons who are talking with one another, as the case
may be. Discourse 'lets something be seen' à7T6 ••• : that is, it lets us
see something from the very thing which the discourse is about. 2 In
discourse (à7T6</>avu'S"), so far as it is genuine, what is said [was geredet
ist] is drawnfrom what the talk is about, so that discursive communication,
in what it says [in ihrem Gesagten], makes manifest what it is talking
about, and thus makes this accessible to the other party. This is the
structure of the À6yoS" as à7T6</>avu,S". This mode of making manifest
in the sense of letting something be seen by pointing it out, does not go
with aIl kinds of 'discourse'. Requesting (€VX77), for instance, also makes
manifest, but in a different way.
When fully concrete, discoursing (letting something be seen) has the
character of speaking [Sprechens]-vocal proclamation in words. The
À6yoS" is </>wvTJ, and indeed, </>wvq P.€Td. </>avrautas-an utterance in
which something is sighted in each case.
And only because the function of the À6yoS" as à7T6</>avu,S" lies in
letting something be seen by pointing it out, can the >.6yoS" have the
structural form of aVv8€u,S". Here "synthesis" does not mean a binding
and linking together of representations, a manipulation of psychical
occurrences where the 'problem" arises of how these bindings, as something inside, agree with something' physi~al outside. Here the uvv has a
purely apophantical signification and means letting something be seen
in its togetherness [Beisammen] with something-Ietting it be seen as something.
Furthermore, because the À6yoS" is a letting-something-be-seen, it can
therefore be true or false. But here everything depends on our steering clear
of any conception of truth which is construed in the sense of 'agreement'.
This idea is by no means the primary one in the concept of àÀ~ 8€,a.
The 'Being-true' of the À6yoS" as àÀT)8€v€w means that in My€,v as
à7To</>atv€u8a, the entities of which One is talWng must be taken out of their
hiddenness; one must let them be seen as something unhidden (àÀT)8l,,);
l ' . . . offenbar machen das, wovon in der Rede "die Rede" ist.'
2 ' ••• von dem selbst her, wovon die Rede ist.'

INT. II

Being and Time
57
that is, they must be discovered. 1 Similarly, 'Being false' ({JwS€u8a,)
amounts to deceiving in the sense of covering up [verdecken] : putting something in front of something (in such a way as to let it be seen) and thereby
passing it off as something which it is not.
But because 'truth' has this meaning, and because the À6yoS" is a
definite mode of letting something be seen, the À6yoS" is just not the kind of
thing that can be considered as the primary 'locus' of truth. If, as has
become quîte customary nowadays, one defines "truth" as something that
'reaIly' pertains to judgment, 2 and if one then invokes the support of
Aristotle with this thesis, not only is this unjustified, but, above aIl, the
Greek conception of truth has been misunderstood. Atu8T)uîS", the sheer
sensory perception of something, is 'true' in the Greek sense, apd indeed
more primordially than the À6yoS" which we have been discussing. Just
as seeing aims at colours, any atu8T)u,S" aims at its tS,a (those entities
which are genuinely accessible only through it and for it); and to that
extent this perception is always true. This means that seeing always
discovers colours, and hearing always discovers sounds. Pure vO"'V is
the perception of the simplest determinate ways of Being which entities
as such may posse~s, and it perceives them just by looking at them. 3
This vo"'v is what is 'true' in the purest and most primordial sense; that
is to say, it merely discovers, and it does so in such a way that it can never
cover up. This vo"'v can never cover up; it can never be false; it can at
worst remain a non-perceiving, àyvo",v, not sufficing for straightforward
and appropriate access.
When something no longer takes the form of just letting something be
seen, but is always harking back to something else to which it points, so
that it lets something be seen as something, it thus acquîres a synthesisstructure, and with this it takes over the possibility oftovering up.4. The
'truth ofjudgments', however, is merely the opposite of this covering-up,
a secondary phenomenon of truth, with more than one kind of foundation. Il
Bath realism and idealism have-with equal thoroughness-missed the
meaning of the Greek conception of truth, in terms of which only the
1 The Greek words for 'truth' (~ cU~8fi'a, TO cU"I8/s) are compounded of the
privative prefix 0.- ('not') and the verbal stem ->'a9- ('to escape notice', 'to he
concealed'). The truth may thus be Iooked upon as that which is un-concealed, that
which gets discovered or uncovered ('entdeckt').
li 'Wenn man ..• Wahrheit ais das bestimmt, was "eigentlich" dem Urteil zukommt •••'
a'••• das schlicht hinsehende Vernehmen der einfachsten Seinsbestimmungen des
Seienden ais solchen.'
"Was nicht mehr die Vollzugsform des reinen Sehenlassens hat, sondern je im Aufweisen auf ein anderes rekurriert und so je etwas als etwas sehen Iasst, das übernimmt mit
dieser Synthesisstruktur die Mëglichkeit des Verdeckens.'
6 '. • • ein mehrfach fundiertes Phiinomen von Wahrheit.' A 'secondary' or 'founded'
phenomenon is one which is based upon something eise. The notion of 'Fundierung' is
one which Heidegger has taken over from Husserl. See our note l, p. 86, on H. 59 below.

34

58

Being and Time

INT. II

possibility of something like a 'doctrine of ideas' can be understood as
philosophical knowledge.
And because the function of the À6yos lies in merely letting something
be seen, in letting entities be perceived [im Vernehmenlassen des Seienden],
À6yos can signify the reason [Vemunft]. And because, moreover, ..\6yoS' is
used not ooly with the signification of My€w but also with that of
À€y6p.€vov (that which is exhibited, as such), and because the latter is
nothing else than the tnroK€lp.€Vov which, as present-at-hand, already
lies at the bottom [zum Grunde] ofanyprocedure ofaddressing oneselfto it or
discussing it, ÀOY0S' qua À€yoP.€VOV means the ground, the ratio. And finaIly,
because À6yoS' as À€y6p.€VOV can also signify that which, as something to
which one addresses oneself, becomes visible in its relation to something in
its 'relatedness', À6yoS' acquires the signification of relation and relationship.l
This Interpretation of 'apophantical discourse' may suffice to clarify
the primary function of the ÀOyoS'.

C. The Preliminary Conception of Phenomenology
When we envisage concretely what we have set forth in our Interpretation of 'phenomenon' and 'logos', we are struck by an inner relationship
between the things meant by these terms. The expression "phenomenology" may be formulated in Greek as My€w 'Tà ef>ulvop.€vu, where
MYHV means chroef>ulv€u8ut. Thus "phenomenology" means à7TOef>ulv€u8ut
'Tà ef>uw6p.€vu-to let thatwhichshowsitselfbeseenfromitselfin the very way
in which it shows itselffrom itself. This is the formaI meaning of that branch
of research which calls itself "phenomenology". But here we are expressing
nothing else than the maxim formulated above: 'To the things themselves!'
Thus the term "phenomenology" is quite different in its meaning froni
expressions such as "theology" and the like. Those terms designate the
1 Heidegger ~ here pointin~ out that the word IIlFpos is etymologically akin to the
verh Mrnv, .which ~as among Its,numerous meanings those of laying out, exhibiting, setting
forth, recountmg, tel/mg a tale, maJcmg a statement. Thus lIoros as Mrnv can he thought of
as the faculty of'reason' ('Vernunft') which makes such activities possible. But lIoros can
3i1~o mean 1'0 lI~o/-,&ov. (that which is ~aid out, exhibited, set forth, told); in this sense
It ~ the und~lymg s~bJect matter (1'0 u.roK€l/-,&ov) to which one addresses oneself and
whlch one discusses ( Ansprechen und Besprechen'); as such it lies 'at the bottom' ('zum
G~dc:') ofwhat is exhibited or told, and is thus the 'ground' or 'reason' ('Grund') for
te!lmg It. But w~~n some~in~ is exhibited or to!d, it is exhibited in its re~atedness ('in
semer Bezogenhelt ) j and m thlS way lIoros as lI€ro/-,&oV cornes to stand for Just such a
relation or relationship ('Beziehung und Verhiiltnis'). The three senses here distinguished
correspond. to three se~~ of the Latin 'ratio', by which lIoroS' was traditionally translated,
tho~gh Heidegger expl~cltly ~al!s attention to only one of these. Notice that 'Beziehung'
(whlch we translate as relation) can also he used in sorne contexts where 'Ansprechen'
(our 'addressing oneself') would he equally appropriate~ Notice further that 'Verhiiltnis'
(ou~ 'relationship'), which is ordinarily a synonym for 'Beziehung', can, like .\OroS' and
'ratto', also refer to the special kind of relationship which one finds in a mathematical
proportion. The etymological connection hetween 'Vernehmen' and 'Vernunft' should
also he noted.

INT. II
Being and Time
59
objects of their respective sciences according to the subject-matter which
they comprise at the time [in ihrer jeweiligen Sachhaltigkeit]. 'Phenomenology' neither designates the object of its researches, nor characterizes the subject-matter thus comprised. The word merely informs us of
the "how" with which what is to be treated in this science gets exhibited
and handled. To have a science 'of' phenomena means to grasp its objects
in such a way that everything about them which is up for discussion must be
treated by exhibiting it directIy and demonstrating it directIy.l The
expression 'descriptive phenomenology', which is at bottom tautological,
has the same meaning. Here "description" does not signify such a procedure as we find, let us say, in botanical morphology; the term has rather
the sense of a prohibition-the avoidance of characterizing anything
without such demonstration. The character of this description itself,
the specific meaning of the À6yoS', can be established first of aIl in
terms of the 'thinghood' ["Sachheit"] of what is to be 'described'-that
is to say, of what is to be given scientific definiteness as we encounter it
phenomenaIly. The signification of "phenomenon", as conceived both
formally and in the ordina.ry mlinner, is such that any exhibiting of an
entity as it shows itself in itself, may be called "phenomenology" with
formaI justification.
Now what must be taken into account if the formaI conception of
phenomenon is to be deformalized into the phenomenological one, and
how is this latter to be distinguished from the ordinary conception? What
is it that phenomenology is to 'let us see'? What is it that must be called
a 'phenomenon' in a distinctive sense? What is it that by its very essence
is necessarily the theme whenever we exhibit sOJllething explicitly? ManifestIy, it is something that proximally and for the most part does not show
itself at aIl: it is something that lies hidden, in contrast to that which
proximally and for the most part does show itself; but at the same time it
is something that beiongs to whàt thus shows itself, and it belongs to it so
essentially as to constitute its meaning and its ground.
Yet that which remains hidden in an egregious sense, or which relapses
and gets covered up again, or which shows itself only 'in disguise', is not just
this entity or that, but rather the Being of entities, as our previous observations have shown. This Being can be covered up so extensively that it
becomes forgotten and no question arises about it or about its meaning.
Thus that which demands that it become a phenomenon, ·and which
demands this in a distinctive sense and in terms of its ownmost content as
a thing, is what phenomenology has taken into its grasp thematically
as its object.
1 ••• in direkter Aufweisung und direkter Auaweisung •.•'

35

Being and Time
INT. II
Phenomenology is our way of access to what is to be the theme of
ontology, and it is our way of giving it demonstrative precision. Only as
phenomenology, is ontology possible. In the phenomenological conception of
"phenomenon" what one has in mind as that which shows itself is the
Being of entities, its meaning, its modifications and derivatives. 1 And this
showing-itselfis notjust any showing-itself, nor is it some such thing as
appearing. Least of aIl can the Being of entities ever be anything such that
'behind it' stands something else 'which does not appear'.
'Behind' the phenomena of phenomenology there is essentially nothing
else; on the other hand, what is to become a phenomenon can be hidden.
And just because the phenomena are proximally and for the most part
not given, there is need for phenomenology. Covered-up-ness is the counterconcept to 'phenomenon'.
There are various ways in which phenomena can be covered up. In the
first place, a phenomenon can be covered up in the sense that it is still
quite undiscovered. It is neither known nor unknown. 2 Moreover, a
phenomenon can be buried over [verschüttet]. This means that it has at some
time been discovered but has deteriorated [verfiel] to the point of getting
covered up again. This covering-up can become complete; or rather-and
as a rule-what has been discovered earlier may still be visible, though
onlyas a semblance. Yet so much semblance, so much 'Being'. 3 This covering-up as a 'disguising' is both the most frequent and the most dangerous,
for here the possibilities of deceiving and misleading are especially
stubborn. Within a 'system', perhaps, those structures of Being-and
their concepts-which are still available but veiled in their indigenous
character, may daim their rights. For when they have been bound
together constructively in a system, they present themselves as something
'dear', requiring no further justification, and thus can serve as the point
of departure for a process of deduction.
"
The covering-up itself, whether in the sense of hiddenness, buryingover, or disguise, has in turn two possibilities. There are coverings-up
which are accidentaI; there are also some which are necessary, grounded
in what the thing discovered consists in [der Bestandart des Entdeckten].
Whenever a phenomenological concept is drawn from primordial sources,
60

36

,

l'Der phiinomenologische Begriff von Phiinomen meint ais das Sichzeigende das Sein
des Seienden, seinen Sinn, seine Modifikationen und Derivate.'
Il 'über seinen Bestand gibt es weder Kenntnis noch Unkenntn~ The earlier editions
have 'Erk~nntni~' ~here ~e latter one~ have :Un~enntnis'. T~e word 'Bestand' aIways
presents .dIfficultIes In Heidegger; here It permlts elther of t}Vo Interpretations, which we
have dehberately steered between: 'Whether there is any sucn thing is neither known nor
un~own', and 'What it comprises is something of which we ha~e neither knowledge
nor Ignorance.',
3 'Wieviel Schein jedoch, soviel "Sein".'

Being and Time
61
there is a possibility that it may degenerate if communicated in the form
of an assertion. It gets understood in an empty way and is thus passed
on, losing its indigenous character, and becoming a free-fioating thesis.
Even in the concrete work of phenomenology itself there lurks the possibility that what has been primordially 'within our grasp' may become
hardened so that we can no longer grasp it. And the difficulty of this
kind of research lies in making it self-critical in a positive sense.
The way in which Being and its structures are encountered in the mode
of phenomenon is one which must first of aIl be wrested from the objects
of phenomenology. Thus the very point of departure [Ausgang] for our
analysis requires that it be secured by the proper method, just as much as
does our access [Zugang] to the phenomenon, or our passage [Durchgang]
through whatever is prevalently covering it up. The idea of grasping and
explicating phenomena in a way which is 'original' and 'intuitive'
["originaren" und "intuitiven"] is directly opposed to the naïveté of a
haphazard, 'immediate', and unrefiective 'beholding'. ["Schauen"].
Now that we have delimited our preliminary conception of phenomenology, the terms 'phenomenal' and phenomenological' can also be fixed in
their signification. That which is given and explicable in the way the
phenomenon is encountered is called 'phenomenal'; this is what we have
in mind when we talk about "phenomenal structures". Everything which
belongs to the species of exhibiting and explicating and which goes to
make up the way of c'Onceiving demanded by this research, is called
'phenomenological'.;
.
Because phenomena, as understood phenomenologicaIly, are never
anything but what goes to make up Being, while Being is in every case
the Being of some entity, we must first bring forward the entities themselves if it is our aim that Beip.g should be laid bare; and we must do this
in the right way. These entii:ïes must likewise show themselves with the
kind of access which genuinely belongs to them. And in this way the
ordinary conception of phenomenon becomes phenomenologically relevant. If our analysis is to be authentic, its aim is such that the prior task
of assuring ourselves 'phenomenologicaIly' of that entity which is to serve
as our example, has already been prescribed as our point of departure.
With regard to its subject-matter, phenomenology is the science of the
Being of entities-ontology. In explaining the tasks of ontology we found
it necessary that there should be a fundamental ontology taking as its
theme that entity which is ontologico-ontically distinctive, Dasein, in
order to confront the cardinal problem-the question of the meaning of
Being in generaI. Our investigation itself will show that the meaning of
phenomenological description as a method lies in interpretation. The ÀOYos
INT. II

37

38

62
Being and Time
INT. II
of the phenomenology of Dasein has the character of a €pp:rlv€v€W,
through which the authentic meaning of Being, and also those basic
structures ofBeingwhich Dasein itse1fpossesses, are made known to Dasein's
understanding of Being. The phenomenology of Dasein is a hermeneutic in
the primordial signification of this word, where it designates this business
of interpreting. But to the extent that by uncovering the meaning of Being
and the basic structures of Dasein in general we may exhibit the horizon
for any further ontological study of those entities which do not have the
character ofDasein, this hermeneutic also becomes a 'hermeneutic' in the
sense ofworking out the conditions on which the possibility of any ontological investigation depends. And finally, to the extent that Dasein, as
an entity with the possibility of existence, has ontological priority over
every other entity, "hermeneutic", as an interpretation of Dasein's Being,
has the third and specific sense of an analytic of the existentiality of
existence; and this is the sense which is philosophically primary. Then so
far as this hermeneutic works out Dasein's historicality ontologically as
the ontical condition for the possibility of historiology, it contains the
roots ofwhat can be called 'hermeneutic' only in a derivative sense: the
methodology of those humane sciences which are historiological in
character.
Being, as the basic theme of philosophy, is no class or genus of entities;
yet it pertains to every entity. Its 'universality' is to be sought higher
up. Being and the structure of Being lie beyond every entity and every
possible character which an entity may possess. Being is the transcendens
pure and simple. 1 And the transcendence of Dasein's Being is distinctive in
that it implies the possibility and the necessity of the most radical individuation. Every disclosure ofBeing as the transcendens is transcendental knowledge.
Phenomenological truth (the disclosedness cif Being) is veritas transcendentalis.
Ontology and phenomenology are' not two di~tinct philosophical disciplines among others. These terms characterize philosophy itself with
regard to its object and its way of treating that object. Philosophy is
universal phenomenological ontology, and takes its departure from the
hermeneutic of Dasein, which, as an analytic of existence, has made fast
the guiding-line for all philosophical inquiry at the point where it arises
and to which it returns.
The following investigation would 'have have been possible if the ground
had not been prepared by Edmund Husserl, with whose Logische Untersuchungen phenomenology first emerged. Our comments on the pre1iminary
conception of phenomenology have shown that wHat is essential in it
1 '~ei~ und ~einsstru~tur liegen i;iber jedes Seiende and jede m6gliche seiende Bestimmthell emes Selenden hmaus. Sein !st fias transcendens schlechthin.'

INT. II
Being and Time
63
does not lie in its actualiry as a philosophical 'movement' ["Richtung"].
Higher than actuality stands possibiliry. We can understand phenomenology only by seizing upon it as a possibility.v
With regard to the awkwardness and 'inelegance' of expression in the
analyses to come, we may remark that it is one thing to give a report
in which we tell about entities, but another to grasp entities in their Being.
For the latter task we lack not only most of the words but, above all, the
'grammar'. Ifwe may allude to sorne earlier researchers on the analysis
of Being, incomparable on their own level, we may compare the ontological sections of Plato's Parmenides or the fourth chapter of the seventh
book of Aristotle's Metaphysics with a narrative section from Thucydides;
we can then see the altogether unprecedented character of those formulations which were imposed upon the Greeks by their philosophers. And
where our powers are essentially weaker, and where moreover the area
of Being to be disclosed is ontologically far more difficult than that which
was presented to the Greeks, the harshness of our expression will be
enhanced, and so will the minuteness of detail with which our concepts
are formed.
~ 8. Design cif the Treatise

The question of the meaning of Being is the most universal and the
emptiest of questions, but at the same time it is possible to individualize
it very precise1y for any particular Dasein. Ifwe are to arrive at the basic
concept of 'Being' and to outline the ontological conceptions which it
requires and the variations which it necessarily undergoes, we need a clue
which is concrete. We shall proceed towards the concept of Being by way
of an Interpretation of a certain special entity, Dasein, in which we
shall arrive at the horizon for the understanding of Being and for the
possibility of interpreting it; the universality of the concept of Being is
not belied by the re1atively 'special' character of our investigation.
But this very entity, Dasein, is in itself 'historical', so that its ownmost ontological e1ucidation necessarily becomes an 'historiological'
Interpretation.
Accordingly our treatment of the question of Being branches out into
two distinct tasks, and our treatise will thus have two parts:

Part One: the Interpretation of Dasein in terms of temporality, and the
explication of time as the transcendental horizon for the question of
Being.
Part T wo: basic features of a phenomenological destruction of the
history of ontology, with the problematic of Temporality as our clue.

39

64

Being and Time

INT. II

Part One has three divisions
J. the preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein;
2. Dasein and temporality;
3. cime and Being. 1
Part Two likewise has three divisions: 1
J. Kant's doctrine of schematism and time, as a preliminary stage in
a problematic of Temporality;
2. the ontological foundation of Descartes' 'cogito sum', and how the
medieval ontology has been taken over into the problematic of the
'res cogitans' ;
3. Aristotle's essay on time, as providing a way of discriminating
the phenomenal basis and the limits of ancient ontology.
1 Part Two and the third division of Part One have never appeared.

PART ONE
THE INTERPRETATION OF DASEIN IN TERMS
OF TEMPORALITY, AND THE EXPLICATION
OF TIME AS THE TRANSCENDENTAL
HORIZON FOR THE QUESTION OF BEING

DIVISION ONE
PREPARATORY FUNDAMENTAL ANALYSIS
OF DASEIN
1 N the question about the meaning of Being, what is primarily interrogated is those entities which have the character ofDasein. The preparatory
existential analytic of Dasein must, in accordance with its peculiar character, be expounded in outline, and distinguished from other kinds of
investigation which seem to run parallel (Chapter 1.) Adhering to the
procedure which we have fixed upon for starting our investigation, we
must lay bare a fundamental structure in Dasein: Being-in-the-world
(Chapter 2). In the interpretation of Dasein, this structure is something
'a priori'; it is not pieced together, but is primordiaHy and constantly a
whole. It affords us, however, various ways of looking at the items which
are constitutive for it. The whole of this structure always cornes first; but
if we keep this constantly in view, these items, as phenomena, will be
made to stand out. And thus we shaH have as objects for analysis: the
world in its worldhood (Chapter 3), Being-in-the-world as Being-with and
Being-one's-Self (Chapter 4), and Being-in as such (Chapter 5)' By
analysis of this fundamental structure, the Being of Dasein can be indicated provisionally. Its existential meaning is care (Chapter 6).

1
EXPOSITION OF THE TASK OF A PREPARATORY
ANALYSIS OF DASEIN
~ 9. The Theme of the Ana!Jtic of Dasein
W E are ourse1ves the entities to be analysed. The Being of any such entity
is in each case mine. l These entities, in their Being, comport themselves
towards their Being. As entities with such Being, they are de1ivered over
to their own Being. 2 Being is that which is an issue for every such entity.3
This way of characterizing Dasein has a double consequence:
I. The 'essence' ["Wesen"] of this entity lies in its "to be" [Zu-sein]. Its
Being-what-it-is [Was-sein] (essentia) must, so far as we can speak of it at
aU, be conceived in terms ofits Being (existentia). But here our ontological
task is to show that when we choose to designate the Being of this entity
as "existence" [Existenz], this term does not and cannot have the ontological signification of the traditional term "existentia"; ontologically,
existentia is tantamount to Being-present-at-hand, a kind of Being which is
essentiaUy inappropriate to entities of Dasein's character. To avoid
getting bewildered, we shaH always use the Interpretative expression
"presence-at-hand" for the term "existentia", while the term "existence", as
a designation of Being, will be aHotted sole1y to Dasein.
The essence of Dasein lies in its existence. Accordingly those characteristics
which can be exhibited in this entity are not 'properties' present-at-hand
of sorne entity which 'looks' so and so and is itse1f present-at-hand;
they are in each case possible ways for it to be, and no more than that.
AlI the Being-as-it-is [So-sein] which this entity possesses is primarily
Being. So when we designate this entity with the term 'Dasein', we are
expressing not its "what" (as if it were a table, house or tree) but its Being.
2. That Being which is an issue for this entity in its very Being, is in
each case mine. Thus Dasein is never to be taken ontologicaHy as an
1 'Das Seiende, dessen Analyse zur Aufgabe steht, sind wir je selbst. Das Sein dieses
Seienden ist je meines.' The reader must not get the impression that there is anything
solipsistic about the second of these sentences. The point is merely that the kind of Being
which belongs to Dasein is ofa sort which any of us may calI his own.
2 'Als Seiendes dieses Seins ist es seinem eigenen Sein überantwortet.' The earlier
editions read '... seinem eigenen Zu-sein •. .'
3 See note 2, p. 28, H. 8 above.

42

68

43

Being and Time

I. 1

instance or special case of sorne genus of entities as things that are
present-at-hand. 1 To entities such as these, their Being is 'a matter of
indifference';2 or more precisely, they 'are' such that their Being can be
neither a matter of indifference to them, nor the opposite. Because
Dasein has Ùl each case mineness [Jemeinigkeit] , one must always use a
personal pronoun when one addresses it: '1 am', 'you are'.
Furthermore, in each case Dasein is mine to be in one way or another.
Dasein has always made some sort of decision as to the way in which it is
in each case mine [je meines]. That entity which in its Being has this very
Being as an issue, comports itself towards its Being as its ownmost possibility. In each case Dasein is its possibility, and it 'has' this possibility,
but notjust as a property [eigenschaftlich], as something present-at-hand
would. And because Dasein is in each case essentially its own possibility,
it can, in its very Being, 'choose' itself and win itself; it can also lose itself
and never win itself; or only 'seem' to do so. But only in so far as it is
essentially something which can be authentic-that is, something ofits own 3
-ean ithavelostitselfand not yet won itself. As modes ofBeing, authenticity
and inauthenticity (these expressions have been chosen terminologically in a
strict sense) are both grounded in the fact that any Dasein whatsoever is
characterized by mineness. 4 But the inauthenticity of Dasein does not signify
any 'less' Being or any 'lower' degree of Being. Rather it is the case that
even in its fullest concretion Dasein can be characterized by inauthenticity
-when busy, when excited, when interested, when ready for enjoyment.
The two characteristics of Dasein which we have sketched-the
priority of 'existentia' over essentia, and the fact that Dasein is in each case
mine [die Jemeinigkeit]-have already indicated that in the analytic of
this entity we are facing a peculiar phenomenal domain. Dasein does not
have the kind of Being which belongs to something merely present-athand within the world, nor does it ever have it. So neither is it to be
presented thematically as something we come across in the same way as
l '. . • ais Vorhandenem'. The earlier editions have the adjective 'vorhandenem'
instead of the substantive.
2 'gleichgültig'. This adjective must be distinguished from the German adjective
'indifferent', though they might both ordinarily be translated by the English 'indifferent',
which we shall reserve exclusively for the former. In most passages, the latter is best
translated by 'undifferentiated' or 'without further differentiation'; occasionally, however, it seems preferable to tran.late it by 'Indifferent' with an initial capital. We shall
follow similar conventions with the nouns 'Gleichgültigkeit' and 'Indifferenz'.
3 'Und weil Dasein wesenhaft je seine Moglichkeit ist, kann dieses Seiende in seinem
Sein sich se1bst "wiihlen", gewinnen, es kann sich verlieren, bzw. nie und nur "scheinbar"
gewinnen. Verloren habenkann es sich nur und noch nicht sich gewonnen haben kann es
nur, sofern es seinem 'Vesen nach mogliches eigentliches, das heisst sich zueigen ist.'
ülder editions have 'je wesenhaft' and 'zueigenes'. The connection between 'eigentlich'
('authentic', 'rea!') and 'eigen' ('own') is lost in translation.
4. ' ••• dass Dasein überhaupt durch Jemeini$k!;it bestimmt ist.'

I. 1

Being and Time

69

we come across what is present-at-hand. The right way of presenting it is
so far from self-evident that to determine what form it shaU take is itself
an essential part of the ontological analytic of this entity. Only by presenting this entity in the right way can we have any understanding of its
Being. No matter how provisional our analysis may he, it always requires
the assurance that we have started correctly.
ln determining itself as an entity, Dasein always does so in the light of
a possibility which it is itself and which, in its very Being, it somehow
understands. This is the formaI meaning of Dasein's existential constitution. But this tells us that ifwe are to Interpret this entity ontologically, the
problematic of its Being must be developed from the existentiality of its
existence. This cannot mean, however, that "Dasein" is to be construed
in terms of some concrete possible idea of existence. At the outset of our
analysis it is particularly important that Dasein should not be Interpreted
with the differentiated character [Differenz] of some dcfinite way of
existing, but that it should be uncovered [aufgedcckt] in the undifferentiated character which it has proximaUy and for the most part. This
undifferentiated character of Dasein's evcrydayncss is not notlzing, but a
positive phenomenal characteristic ofthis entity. Out ofthis kind of Being
-and back into it again-is aIl existing, such as it is. 1 We calI this everyday undifferentiated character of Dasein "averageness" [Durchschnittlichkeit].
And because this average everydayness makes up what is ontically
proximal for this entity, it has again and again been passed over in explicating Dasein. That which is ontically c10sest and weIl known, is ontologically the farthest and not known at aU; and its ontological signification
is constantly overlooked. When Augustine asks: "Quid autem propinquius
meipso mihi?" and must answer: "ego certe laboro hic ft laboro in meipso:
factus sum mihi terra difficultatis et sudoris nimii", 1 this applies not only to the
ontical and pre-ontological opaqueness of Dasein but evcn more to the
ontological task which lies ahead; for not only must this entity not be
missed in that kind of Being in which it is phenomenaUy c1osest, but it
must be made accessible by a positive characterization.
Dasein's average everydayness, however, is not to be taken as a mere
'aspect'. Here too, and even in the mode of inauthenticity, the structure
of existentiality lies a priori. And here too Dasein's Being is an issue for it
in a definite way; and Dasein comports itself towards it in the mode of
average everydayness, even if this is only the mode of fleeing in the face
of it and forgetfulness thereof 2
l 'Aus dieser Seinsart heraus und in sie zurück ist alles Existieren, wie est ist.'
2 'Auch in ihr geht es dem Dasein in bestimmter Weise um sein Sein, zu dem es sich

im Modus der durchschnittlichen Alltiiglichkeit verhiilt und sei es auch nur im Modus
der Flucht davor und des Vergessens seiner.' For further discussion, see Section 40 below.

44

70

45

Being and Time

I. 1

But the explication of Dasein in its average everydayness does not give
us just average structures in the sense of a hazy indefiniteness. Anything
which, taken ontically, is in an average way, can be very weIl grasped
ontologically in pregnant structures which may be structurally indistinguishable from certain ontological characteristics [Bestimmungen] of an
autkentic Being of Dasein.
AlI explicata to which the analytic of Dasein gives rise are obtained by
considering Dasein's existence-structure. Because Dasein's characters of
Being are defined in termsofexistentiality, we calI them" existentiali a".
These are to be sharply distinguished from what we calI "categories"characteristics of Being for entities whose character is not that of Dasein. 1
Here we are taking the expression "category" in its primary ontological
signification, and abiding by it. In the ontology of the ancients, the entities
we encounter within the world 2 are taken as the basic examples for the
interpretation of Being. No€Îv (or the À6yos, as the case may be) is
accepted as a way of access to them. 3 Entities are encountered therein.
But the Being of these entities must be something which can be grasped
in a distinctive kind of My€w (letting something be seen), so that this
Being becomes intelligible in advance as that which it is-and as that
which it is already in every entity. In any discussion (.\6yoS') of entities,
we have previously addressed ourselves to Being; this addressing is
lCaTTJyop€Îu8a,. 4o This signifies, in the first instance, making a public
accusation, taking someone to task for something in the presence of everyone. When used ontologically, this term means taking an entity to task,
as it were, for whatever it is as an entity-that is to say, letting everyone
see it in its Being. The lCaTT]Yopla, are what is sighted and what is visible
in such a seeing. 6 They include the various ways in which the nature of
those entities which can be addressed and discussed in a .\6yoS' may be
l 'Weil sie sich aus der Existenzialitat bestimmen, nennen wir die Seinscharaktere des
Daseins Existenzialien. Sie sind scharf zu trennen von den Seinsbestimmungen des nicht
daseinsmassigen Seienden, die wir Kategorien nennen.'
Il ' ••• das innerhalb der Welt begegnende Seiende.' More literally: 'the entity that
encounters within the world.' While Heidegger normally uses the verb 'begegnen' in this
active intransitive sense, a similar construction with the English 'encounter' is unidiomatic and harsh. We shaH as a rule use either a passive construction (as in 'entities encountered') or an active transitive construction (as in 'entities we encounter').
3 'AIs Zugangsart zu ihm gilt das VOEîv bzw. der Àoyos.' Here we follow the reading
of the earlier editions. In the later editions, 'Zugangsart', which is used rather often, is
here replaced by 'Zugangsort', which occurs very se1dom and is perhaps a misprint. This
later version might be translated as foHows: 'voEîv (or the Àoyos, as the case may be)
is accepted as the locus of access to such entities.' On VOEîv and Àoyos see Section 7
above, especially H. 32-34.
4. 'Dasje schon vorgiingige Ansprechen des Seins im Besprechen (,\Gyos) des Seienden
ist das Ka:rrl'yopEîa8al.'
6 'Das in solchem Sehen Gesichtete und Sichtbare .• .' On 'Sehen' and 'Sicht' see H.
147·

1. 1

Being and Time

71

determined a priori. Existentialia and categories are the two basic possibilities for characters of Being. The entities which correspond to them
require different kinds of primary interrogation respectively: any entity
is either a "who" (existence) or a "what" (presence-at-hand in the broadest
sense). The connection between these two modes of the characters of
Being cannot be handled until the horizon for the question of Being has
been clarified.
In our introduction we have already intimated that in the existential
analytic of Dasein we also make headway with a task which is hardly
less pressing than that of the question of Being itself-the task of laying
bare that a priori basis which must be visible before the question of 'what
man is' can be discussed philosophically. The existential analytic ofDasein
cornes bifore any psychology or anthropology, and certainly before any
biology. While these too are ways in which Dasein can be investigated, we
can define the theme of our analytic with greater precision if we distinguish it from these. And at the same time the necessity of that analytic
can thus be proved more incisively.
~ ID. How the Anarytic of Dasein is to be Distinguished from Anthropology,
Psychology, and Biology
Mter a theme for investigation has been initially outlined in positive
terms, it is always important to show what is to be ruled out, although it
can easily become fruitless to discuss what is not going to happen. We must
show that those investigations and formulations of the question which have
been aimed at Dasein heretofore, have missed the real philosophical problem (notwithstanding their objective fertility), and that as long as they
persist in missing it, they have no right to claim that they can accomplish
that for which they are basically striving. In distinguishing the existential
analytic from anthropology, psychology, and biology, we shall confine
ourselves to what is in principle the ontological question. Our distinctions
will necessarily be inadequate from the standpoint of 'scientific theory'
simply because the scientific structure of the above-mentioned disciplines
(not, indeed, the 'scientific attitude' of those who work to advance them)
is today thoroughly questionable and needs to be attacked in new ways
which must have their source in ontological problematics.
Historiologically, the aim of the existential analytic can be made
plainer by considering Descartes, who is credited with providing the point
of departure for modern philosophical inquiry by his discovery of the
"cogito sum". He investigates the "cogitare" of the "ego", at least within
certain limits. On the other hand, he leaves the "sum" completely undisc\lssed,even though it is regarded as no less primordial than the cogito. Our

46

47

72
Being and Time
I. 1
analytic raises the ontological question of the Being of the "sum". Not until
the nature of this Being has been determined can we grasp the kind of
Being which belongs to cogitationes.
At the same time it is of course misleading to exemplify the aim of our
analytic historiologically in this way. One of our first tasks will be to
prove that ifwe posit an "1" or subject as that which is proximally given,
we shall completely miss the phenomenal content [Bestand] of Dasein.
Ontologically, every idea of a 'subject'-unless refined by a previous ontological determination of its basic character-still posits the subjectum
(woKt:lJL€Vov) along with it, no matter how vigorous one's ontical
protestations against the 'soul substance' or the 'reification of consciousness'. The Thinghood itselfwhich such reification implies must have its
ontological origin demonstrated if we are to be in a position to ask what
we are to understand positively when we think of the unreified Being of
the subject, the soul, the consciousness, the spirit, the person. AlI these
terms refer to definite phenomenal domains which can be 'given form'
["ausformbare"]: but they are never used without a notable failure to
see the need for inquiring about the Being of the entities thus designated.
So we are not being terminologically arbitrary when we avoid these
terms--or such expressions as 'life' and 'man'-in designating those
entities which we are ourselves.
.
On the other hand, if we understand it rightly, in any serious and
scientifically-minded 'philosophy of life' (this expression says about as
much as "the botany of plants") there lies an unexpressed tendency
towards an understanding of Dasein's Being. What is conspicuous in such
a philosophy (and here it is d~fective in principle) is that here 'life' itself
as a kind of Being does not become ontologically a problem.
The researches of Wilhelm Dilthey were stimulated by the perennial
question of 'life'. Starting from 'life' itself as a whole, he tried to understand its 'Experiences'lin their structural anddevelopmentalinter-connections. His 'geisteswissenschoftliche Psychologie' is one which no longer seeks
to be oriented towards psychical elements and atoms or to piece the life
of the soul together, but aims rather at 'Gestalten' and 'life as a whole'.
Its philosophical relevance, however, is not to be sought here, but rather
in the fact that in aIl this he was, above alt, on his way towards the question
of 'life'. To be sure, we can also see here very plainly how limited were
both his problematic and the set of concepts with which it had to be put
l'Die "Erlebnisse" dieses "Lebens" .. .' The connection between 'Leben' ('life')
and 'Erlebnisse' ('Experiences') is lost in translation. An 'Erlebnis' is not just any
'experience' ('Erfahrung'), but one which we feel deeply and 'live through'. We shaH
translate 'Erlebnis' and 'erleben' by 'Experience' with a capital 'E', reserving 'experience'
for 'Erfahrung' and 'erfahren'.

Being and Time
73
into words. These limitations, however, are found not only in Dilthey and
Bergson but in aIl the 'personalitic' movements to which they have given
direction and in every tendency towards a philosophical anthropology.
The phenomenological Interpretation of personality is in principle more
radical and more transparent; but the question of the Being of Dasein
has a dimension which this too fails to enter. No matter how much
HusserlU and Scheler may differ in their respective inquiries, in their
methods of conducting them, and in their orientations towards the world
as a whole, they are fully in agreement on the negative side of their
Interpretations of personality. The question of 'personal Being' itself is
one which they no longer raise. We have chosen Scheler's Interpretation
as an example, not only because it is accessible in print,lU but because he
emphasizes personal Being explicitly as such, and tries to determine its
character by defining the specifie Being of acts as contrasted with anything 'psychical'. For Scheler, the person is never to be thought of as a
Thing or a substance; the person 'is rather the uniry of living-through
[Er-Iebens] which is immediately experienced in and with our Experiences-not a Thing merely thought ofbehind and outside what is immediately Experienced';lv The person is no Thinglike and substantial Being.
Nor can the Being of a person be entirely absorbed in being a subject of
rational acts which follow certain laws.
The person is not a Thing, not a substance, not an object. Here Scheler
is emphasizing what Husserlv suggests when he insists that the unity of
the person must have a Constitution essentially different from that
required for the unity of Things of Nature. l What Scheler says of the
person, he applies to acts as weIl: 'But an act is never also an object; for
it is essential to the Being of acts that they are Experienced only in their
performance itself and given in refiection.'vl Acts are something nonpsychical. Essentially the person exists only in the performance of intentional acts, and is therefore essentially not an object. Any psychical
Objectification of acts, and hence any way of taking them as something
psychical, is tantamount to depersonalization. A person is in any case
given as a performer of intentional acts which are bound together by the
unity of a meaning. .Thus psychical Being has nothing to do with personal
Being. Acts get performed; the person is a performer ofacts. What, however, is the ontological meaning of 'performance'? How is the kind of
Being which belongs to a person to be ascertained ontologically in a
positive way? But the critical question cannot stop here. It must face the
Being of the whole man, who is customarily taken as a unity of body,

I. 1

l'•.• wenn er für die Einheit der Person eine wesentlich andere Konstitution fordert
ais fùr die der Naturdinge.' The second 'der' appears in the later editions only.

48

74

49

Being and Time

I. 1

soul, and spirit. In their turn "body", "soul", and "spirit" may designate
phenomenal domains which can be detached as themes for definite
investigations; within certain limits their ontological indefiniteness may
not be important. When, however, we come to the question of man's
Being, this is not something we can simply compute 1 by adding together
those kinds of Being which body, soul, and spirit respectively possesskinds of Being whose nature has not as yet been determined. And even
if we should attempt such an ontological procedure, sorne idea of the
Being of the whole must be presupposed. But what stands in the way of the
basic question ofDasein's Being (or leads'it off the track) is an orientation
thoroughly coloured by the anthropology of Christianity and the ancient
world, whose inadequate ontological foundations have been overlooked
both by the philosophyoflife and by personalism. There are two important
elements in this traditional anthropology:
I. 'Man' is here defined as a 'o/0v "-orov €XoV, and this is Interpreted
to mean an animal rationale, something living which has reason. But the
kind of Being which belongs to a 'o/0v is understood in the sense of
occurring and Being-present-at-hand. The "-oros is sorne superior endowment; the kind of Being which belongs to it, however, remains quite as
obscure as that of the entire entity thus compounded.
2. The second clue for determining the nature of man's Being and
essence is a theological one Ka~ €t7T€V 0 8€os. 7TOt~O'WfL€V av8pw7Tov KaT'
€lKOVa. ~fL€T'paV Ka~ Ka8' ofLotwO'w-''faciamus hominem ad imaginem
nostram et similitudinem"vl1 With this as its point of departure,
the anthropology of Christian theology, taking with it the ancient
definition, arrives at an interpretation of that entity which we caU
"man". But just as the Being of Gad gets Interpreted ontologicaUy
by means of the ancient ontology, so does the Being of the ens finitum, and
to an even greater extent. In modern times the Christian definition has
been deprived of its theological character. But the idea of 'transcendence'
-that man is something that reaches beyond himself-is rooted in Christian dogmatics, which can hardly be said to have made an ontological
problem of man's Being. The idea of transcendence, according to which
man is more than a mere something endowed with intelligence, has
worked itself out with different variations. The following quotations will
illustrate how these have originated: 'His praeclaris dotibus excelluit prima
hominis conditio, ut ratio, intelligentia, prudentia, judicium non modo ad terrenae
vitae gubernationem suppeterent, sed quibus t r ans c end e r e t usque ad Deum
et aeternamfelicitatem.'viU 'Denn dass der mensch sin ufs e h e n hat ufCott und
1 Reading 'errechnet'. The earliest editions have 'verrechnet', with the correct reading
provided in a list of errata.

I. 1
Being and Time
75
sin wort, ~eigt er klarlich an, dass er nach siner natur etwas Cott niiher anerborn,
etwas mee n a c h s chi li g t, etwas ~ u ~ u g s ~ u im hat, das alles on ~wYfel
darus Jlüsst, dass er nach dem b i l d nus Cottes geschaffen ist' .lx
The two sources which are relevant for the traditional anthropologythe Greek definition and the clue which theology has provided-indicate
that over and above the attempt to determine the essence of 'man' as an
entity, the question of his Being has remained forgotten, and that this
Being is rather conceived as something obvious or 'self-evident' in the
sense of the Being-present-at-hand of other created Things. These two clues
become intertwined in the anthropology of modern times, where the res
cogitans, consciousness, and the interconnectedness of Experience serve as
the point of departure for methodical study. But since even the cogitationes
are either left ontologically undetermined, or get tacitly assumed as
something 'self-evidently' 'given' whose 'Being' is not to be questioned,
the decisive ontological foundations of apthropological problematics
remain undetermined.
This is no less true of 'psychology', whose anthropological tendencies are
today unmistakable. Nor can we compensate for the absence of ontological foundations by taking anthropology and psychology and building
them into the framework of a general biology. In the order which any
possible comprehension and interpretation must foIlow, biology as a
'science oflife' is founded upon the ontology ofDasein, even ifnot entirely.
Life, in its own right, is a kind ofBeing; but essentially it is accessible only
in Dasein. The ontology of life is accomplished by way of a privative
Interpretation; it determines what must be the case ifthere can be anything like mere-aliveness [Nur-noch-Ieben]. Life is not a mere Beingpresent-at-hand, nor is it Dasein. In turn, Dasein is never to be defined
ontologically by regarding it as life (in an ontologically indefinite manner)
plus something else.
'
In suggesting that anthropology, psychology, and biology aIl' fail to
give an unequivocal and ontologically adequate answer to the question
about the kind of Being which belongs to those entities which we ourselves
are, we are not passingjudgment on the positive work ofthese disciplines.
We must always bear in mind, however, that these ontological foundations
can never be disclosed by subsequent hypotheses derived from empirical
material, but that they are always 'there' already, even when that
empirical material simply gets collected. If positive research fails to see
these foundations and holds them to be self-evident, this by no means
proves that they are not basic or that they are not problematic in a more
radical sense than any thesis of positive science can ever be. x

50

Being and Time
I. 1
~ 1 1. The Existential Ana?Jtic and the Interpretation of Primitive Dasein. The
Dijficulties of Achieving a 'Natural Conception of the World'
The Interpretation of Dasein in its everydayness, however, is not
identical with the describing of some primitive stage of Dasein with
which we can become acquainted empirically through the medium of
anthropology. Everydayness does not coincide with primitiveness, but is rather a
mode of Dasein's Being, even when that Dasein is active in a highly
developed and differentiated culture-and precisely then. Moreover,
even primitive Dasein has possibilities of a Being which is not of the
everyday kind, and it has a specific everydayness of its own. To orient the
analysis of Dasein towards the 'life of primitive peoples' can have positive
significance [Bedeutung] as a method because 'primitive phenomena'
are often less concealed and less complicated by extensive self-interpretation on the part of the Dasein in question. Primitive Dasein often speaks
to us more directly in terms of a primordial absorption in 'phenomena'
(taken in a pre-phenomenological sense). A way of conceiving things
which seems, perhaps, rather clumsy and crude from our standpoint, can
be positively helpful in bringing out the ontological structures of phenomena in a genuine way.
But heretofore our information about primitives has been provided by
ethnology. And ethnology operates with definite preliminary conceptions
and interpretations of human Dasein in general, even in first 'receiving'
its material, and in sifting it and working it up. Whether the everyday
psychology or even the scientific psychology and sociology which the
ethnologist brings with him can provide any scientific assurance that we
can have proper access to the phenomena we are studying, and can interpret them and transmit them in the right way, has not yet been established.
Here too we are confronted with the same state of affairs as in the other
disciplines we have discussed. Ethn~logy itself already presupposes as its
clue an inadequate analytic ofDasein. But since the positive sciences neither
'can' nor should wait for the ontologicallabours ofphilosophy to be done,
the further course of research will not take the form of an 'advance' but
will be accomplished by recapitulating what has already been ontically discovered, and by purifying it in a way which is ontologically more transparent. xl
No matter how easy it may be to show how ontological problematics
differ formally from ontical research there are still difficulties in carrying
out an existential analytic, especiéiIly in making a start. This task includes
a desideratum which philosophy has long found disturbing but has continually refused to achieve: to work out the idea of a 'natural conception of the
world'. The rich store of information now available as to the most exotic
76

51

52

1. 1
Being and Time
77
and manifold cultures and forms of Dasein seems favourable to our setting
about this task in a fruitful way. But this is merely a semblance. At
bottom this plethora ofinformation can seduce us into failing to recognize
the real problem. We shall not get a genuine knowledge of essences simply
by the syncretistic activity of universal comparison and classification.
Subjecting the manifold to tabulation does not ensure any actual understanding of what lies there before us as thus set in order. If an ordering
~rinciple is genuine, it has its own content as a thing [Sachgehalt], which
IS never to be found by means ofsuch ordering, but is already presupposed
in it. So if one is to put various pictures of the world in order, one must
have an explicit idea of the world as such. And if the 'world' itself is
something constitutive for Dasein, one must have an insight into Dasein's
basic structures in order to treat the world-phenomenon conceptuaIly.
In this chapter we have characterized sorne things positively and taken
a negative stand with regard to others; in both cases our goal has been to
promote a correct understanding of the tendency which underlies the
following Interpretation and the kind of questions which it poses.
Ontology can contribute only indirectly towards advancing the positive
disciplines as we find them today. It has a goal ofits own, even if, beyond
the acquiring of information about entities, the question of Being is the
spur for aIl scientific seeking.

II
BEING-IN-THE-WORLD IN GENERAL AS THE
BASIC STATE OF DASEIN

53

~ 12. A Prelimiruzry Sketch of Being-in-the- World, in terms of an Orientation
towards Being-in as such
IN our preparatory discussions (Section 9) we have brought out some
characteristics of Being which will provide us with a steady light for our
further investigation, but which wiH at the same time become structuraHy
concrete as that investigation continues. Dasein is an entity which, in its
very Being, comports itselfunderstandingly towards that Being. In saying
this, we are calling attention to the formai conceptof existence. Dasein exists.
Furthermore, Dasein is an entity which in each case 1 myselfam. Mineness
belongs to any existent Dasein, and belongs to it as the condition which
makesauthenticityand inauthenticitypossible. ln each case Dasein exists in
one or the other of these two modes, or else it is modaHy undifferentiated. 1
But these are both ways in which Dasein's Being takes on a definite
character, and they must be seen and understood a priori as grounded
upon that state of Being which we have caHed "Being-in-the-world'. An
interpretation of this constitutive state is needed if we are to set up our
analytic of Dasein correctly.
Thecomp'ound expression 'Being-in-the-world' indicates in the veryway
we have coined it, that it stands for a unitary phenomenon. This primary
datum must be seen as a whole. But while Being-in-the-world cannot be
broken up into contentswhichmaybepieced together, thisdoesnotprevent
it from having several constitutive items in itsstructure. Indeed the phenomenal datum which our expression indicates is one which may, in fact, be
looked at in three ways. Ifwestudy it, keeping the whole phenomenon firmly
in mind beforehand, the foHowing items may be brought out for emphasis:
First, the 'in-the-world'. With regard to this there arises the task of
inquiring into the ontological structure of the 'world' and defining the
idea of worldhood as such. (See the third chapter of this Division.)
l 'Zum existierenden Dasein gehiirt die Jemeinigkeit aIs Bedingung der Miiglichkeit
von Eigentlichkeit und Uneigentlichkeit. Dasein existiert je in einem dieser Modi bzw.
in der modalen Indifferenz ihrer.'
'

I. 2
Being and Time
79
Second, that entiry which in every case has Being-in-the-world as the
way in which it is. Here we are seeking that which one inquires into when
one asks the question 'Who?' By a phenomenological demonstration1 we
shaH determine who is in the mode of Dasein's average everydayness.
(See the fourth chapter of this Division.)
Thi.rd ,. Being-i~ [In-sein] a,s such. We must set forth the ontological
~~s?tution of lll?ood [Inheit] itself. (See the fifth chapter of this
DIvIsIon.) Emphasis upon any one of these constitutive items signifies
that the others are emphasized along with it; this means that in any such
case the whole phenomenon gets seen. Of course Being-in-the-world is a
state of Dasein 2 which is necessary a priori, but it is far from sufficient for
completely determining Dasein's Being. Before making these three
p~enom~na the themes.for special analyses, we shaH attempt by way of
onentatIOn to charactenze the third of these factors.
What is meant by "Being-in"? Our proximal reaction is to round out
this expression to "Being-in 'in the world''', and wc are inc1ined to
understand this Being-in as 'Being in something' ["Sein in ..."]. This
latter term designates the kind of Being which an entity has when it is
'in' another one, as the water is 'in' the glass, or the garment is 'in' the
cupboard. By this 'in' we mean the relationship of Being which two
entities extended 'in' space have to each other with regard to their location
in that space. Both water and glass, garment and cupboard, are 'in' space
and 'at' a location, and both in the same way. This relationship of Being
can be expanded: for instance, the bench is in the lecture-room the
lecture-room is in the university, the university is in the city and s~ on
.
'
,
until we can say that the bench is 'in world-space'. AH entities whose
Being 'in' one another can thus be described have the same kind of Being
-that of Being-present-at-hand-as Things occurring 'within' the world.
Being-present-at-hand 'in' something which is likewise present-at-hand
and Being-present-at-hand-along-with [Mitvorhandensein] in the sens~
of a definite location-relationship with something else which has the same
kind of Being, are ontological characteristics which wc caH "categorial":
they are of such a sort as to belong to entities whose kind of Being is not
of the character ofDasein.
Being-in, on the other hand, is a state of Dasein's Being; it is an
existentiale. So one cannot think of it as the Being-presentat-hand of sorne corporeal Thing (such as a hurnan body) 'in' an
entity which is present-at-hand. Nor does the terrn "Being-in" rnean
1 Here we follow the oIder editions in reading, 'Ausweisung'. The newer editions have
'Aufweisung' ('exhibition').
2 ' • • • Verfassung des Daseins .. .' The earIiest editions read 'Wesens' instead
'Daseins'. Correction is made in a Iist of errata.

54

Being and Time
I. 2
a spatial 'in-one-another-ness' of things present-at-hand, any more than
the word 'in' primordially signifies a spatial relationship of this kind.t 'In'
is derived from "innan"-"to reside'',l "habitare", "to dwell" [sich auf halten]. 'An' signifies "1 am accustomed", "1 am familiar with", "1 look
after something". 2 It has the signification of "colo" in the senses of "habito"
and "diligo". The entity to which Being-in in this signification belongs is
one which we have characterized as that entity which in each case 1
myself am [bin]. The expression 'bin' is connected with 'bei', and so 'ich
bin' ['1 am'] means in its turn "1 reside" or "dwell alongside" the
world, as that which is familiar to me in such and such a way. 3
"Being" [Sein], as the infinitive of 'ich bin' (that is to say, when it is
understood as an existentiale), signifies "to reside alongside ...", "to be
familiar with ...". "Being-in" is thus theformal existential expressionfor the
Being of Dasein, which has Being-in-the-world as its essential state.
'Being alongside' the world in the sense ofbeing absorbed in the world"
80

1 Reading 'innan-wohnen'. As Heidegger points out in his footnote, this puzzling
passage has its source in Grimm's Kleinere Schriften, Vol. VII, pp. 247 ff., where we find
two short articles, the first entitled 'IN' and the second 'IN UND BEI'. The first
article begins by comparing a number of archaic German words meaning 'domus', aU
having a form similar to our English 'inn', which Grimm mentions. He goes on "to
postulate 'a strong verb "iMan", which must have meant either "habitare", "domi esse",
or "recipere in domum" , (though only a weak derivative form 'innian' is actuaUy found),
with a surviving strong preterite written either as 'an' or as 'ann'. Grimm goes on
to argue that the preposition 'in' is derived from the verb, rather than the verb from the
preposition.
s'•.. "an" bedeutet: ich bin gewohnt, vertraut mit, ich pflege etwas •. .'
ln Grimm's second article he adds: 'there was also an anomalous "ann" with the plural
"lI1ItIum", which expressed "amo", "diligo", ''faveo'', and to which our "gonnen" and
"Gunst" are immediately re1ated, as has long been recognized. "Ann" reaUy means "ich
bin eingewohnt", "pflege zu bauen"; this conceptual transition may be shown with
minimal complication in the Latin "colo", which stands for "habito" as weU as "diligo".'
It is not entire1y dear whether Heidegger's discussion of 'an' is aimed to e1ucidate the
preposition 'an' (which corresponds in sorne ofits usages to the English 'at', and which he
has just used in remarking that the water and the glass are both at a location), or rather
to explain the preterite 'an' of 'innan'.
The reader should note that while the verb 'wohnen' normaUy means 'to reside' or 'to
dweU', the expression 'ich bin gewohnt' means '1 am accustomed to', and 'ich bin eingewohnt' means '1 have become accustomed to the place where 1 reside--to my surroundings'. Similarly 'ich pflege etwas' may mean either '1 am accustomed to do something'
or '1 take care of something' or '1 devote myse1f to it'. (Grimm's 'pflege zu bauen' presumably means '1 am accustomed to putting my trust in something', '1 can build on it'.)
The Latin, 'colo' has the paraUe1 meanings of '1 take care of something' or 'cherish' it
('düigo') and '1 dweU' or '1 inhabit' ('habito').
3 ' ••• ich wohne, halte mich aufbei ... der Welt, ais dem so und so Vertrauten.' The
preposition 'bei', like 'an', does not have quite the semantical range of any English preposition. Our 'alongside', with which we shaU translate it when other devices seem less
satisfactory, especiaUy in the phrase 'Being alongside' ('Sein bei'), is often quite misleading; the sense here is doser to that of 'at' in such expressions as 'at home' or 'at my
father's', or that of the French 'chez'. Here again Heidegger seems to be re1ying upon
Grimm, who proceeds (loc. cit.) to connect 'bei' with 'haum' ('build') and 'hin'.
~ '..• in dem ..• Sinne des Aufgehens in der Welt .. .' 'Aufgehen' means literaUy 'to go
up', or 'to rise' in the sense that the sun 'rises' or the dough 'rises'. But when foUowed by
the preposition 'in', it takes on other meanings. Thus 5 'geht au!, into go in the sense that

I. 2

Being and Time

81

(a sense which calls for still doser interpretation) is an existentiale founded
upon Being-in. In these analyses the issue is one of seeing a primordial
structure of Dasein's Being-a structure in accordance with whose phenomenal content the concepts of Being must be Articulated; because of
this, and because this structure is in principle one which cannot be
grasped by the traditional ontological categories, this 'being-alongside'
must be examined still more dosely. We shall again choose the method of
contrasting it with a relationship of Being which is essentially different
ontologically-viz. categorial-but which we express by the same linguistic means. Fundamental ontological distinctions are easily obliterated;
and if they are to be envisaged phenomenally in this way, this must be
done explicitly, even at the risk of discussing the 'obvious'. The status of
the ontological analytic shows, however, that we have been far from
interpreting these obvious matters with an adequate 'grasp', stilliess with
regard for the meaning of their Being; and we are even farther from
possessing a stable coinage for the appropriate structural concepts.
As an existentiale, 'Being alongside' the world never means anything
like the Being-present-at-hand-together ofThings that occur. There is no
such thing as the 'side-by-side-ness' of an entity called 'Dasein' with
another entity called 'world'. Of course when two things are present-athand together alongside one another,l we are accustomed to express this
occasionally by something like 'The table stands "by" [Obei'] the door'
or 'The chair "touches" ['berührt'] the wall'. Taken strictly, 'touching' is
never what we are talking about in such cases, not because accurate reexamination will always eventually establish that there is a space between
the chair and the wall, but because in principle the chair can never touch
the wall, even if the space between them should be equal to zero. If the
chair could touch the wall, this would presuppose that the wall is the sort
of thing 'for' which a chair would be encounterable. 2 An entity present-athand within the world can be touched byanother entity only if by its
very nature the latter entity has Being-in as its own kind ofBeing---<>nly if,
with its Being-there [Da-sein], something like the world is already re-,
vealed to it, so that from out of that world another entity can manifest
itself in touching, and thus become accessible in its Being-present-athand. When two entities are present-at-hand within the world, and furthermore are worldless in themselves, they can never 'touch' each other,
it 'goes into' go without remainder; a country 'geht auf' into another country into which
it is taken over or absorbed; a person 'geht au!, in anything to which he devotes
himself fully, whether an activity or another person. We shall usually translate 'aufgehen'
by sorne form of 'absorb'.
l 'Das Beisammen zweier Vorhandener .. .'
S 'Voraussetzung dafür wiire, dass die Wand "für" den Stuhl hegegnen k6nnte.' (Cf.
also H. 97 below.)

55

82

56

Being and Time

I. 2

nor can either of them 'he' 'alongside' the other. The clause 'furthermore
are worldless' must not be left out; for even entities which are not worldless-Dasein itse1f, for example-are present-at-hand 'in' the world, or,
more exactly, can with sorne right and within certain limits be taken as
merely present-at-hand. To do this, one must completely disregard or just
not see the existential state of Being-in. But the fact that 'Dasein' can be
taken as something which is present-at-hand and just present-at-hand, is
not to be confused with a certainwayof'presence-at-hand'whichisDasein's
own. This latter kind of presence-at-hand becomes accessible not by disregarding Dasein's specific structures but only by understanding them in
advance. Dasein understands its ownmost Being in the sense of a certain
'factual Being-present-at-hand'.ii And yet the 'factuality' of the fact
[Tatsache] of one's own Dasein is at bottom quite different omologically
from the factual occurrence of sorne kind of mineraI, for example. Whencver Dasein is, it is as a Fact; and the factuality ofsuch a Fact is what we
~hall calI Dasein's ''facticity''.1 This is a definite way of Being [Seinsbestimmtheit], and it has a complicated structure which cannot even be
grasped as a prohlem until Dasein's basic existential states have been
worked out. The concept of "facticity" implies that an entity 'within-theworld' has Being-in-the-world in such a way that it can understand itself
as bound up in its 'destiny' with the Being of those entities which it
encounters within its own world.
In the first instance it is enough to see the ontological difference
between Being-in as an existentiale and the category of the 'insideness'
which things present-at-hand can have with regard to one another. By
thus delimiting Being-in, we are not denying every kind of 'spatiality'
to Dasein. On the contrary, Dasein itse1f has a 'Being-in-space' of its
0\\ n; but this in turn is possible only on the hasis of Being-in-the-world in
gcneral. Rence Being-in is not to be explained ontologically by sorne
ontical characterization, as if one were to say, for instance, that Being-in
in a world is a spiritual property, and that man's 'spatiality' is a result of
his bodily nature (which, at the same time, always gets 'founded' upon
corporeality). Rere again we are faced with the Being-present-at-handtogether of sorne such spiritual Thing along with a corporeal Thing,
while the Being of the entity thus compounded remains more obscure
l 'Die Tatsachlichkeit des Faktums Dasein, aIs welches jeweilig jedes Dasein ist,
nennen wir seine Fakti::itiit.' We shaH as a rule translate 'Tatsachlichkeit' as 'factuality',
and 'Faktizitat' as 'facticity', foHowing our conventions for 'tatsachlich' and 'faktisch'.
(See note 2, p. 27, H. 7 above.) The present passage suggests a comparable distinction
between the nouns 'Tatsache' and 'Faktum'; so while we find many passages where these
seem to be used interchangeably, wc translate 'Faktum' as 'Fact' with an initial capital,
using 'fact' for 'Tatsache' and various other expressions. On 'factuality' and 'facticity'
see also H. 135 bclow.

I. 2
Being and Time
83
than ever. Not until we understand Being-in-the-world as an essential
structure of Dasein can we have any insight into Dasein's existential
spatiality. Such an insight will keep us from failing to see this structure or
from previously cancelling it out-a procedure motivated not ontologically but rather 'metaphysicalIy' by the naïve supposition that man is,
in the first instance, a spiritual Thing which subsequently gets misplaced
'into' a space.
Dasein's facticity is such that its Being-in-the-world has always dispersed [zerstreut} itself or even split itse1f up into definite ways àf Beingin. The multiplicity ofthese is indicated by the following examples: having
to do with something, producing something, attending to something and
looking after it, making use ofsomething, giving something up and letting
it go, undertaking, accomplishing, evincing, imerrogating, considering,
discussing, determining. . . . AlI these ways of Being-in have concern 1 as
their kind ofBeing-a kind of Being which we have yet to characterize in
detai!. Leaving undone, neglecting, renouncing, taking a rest-these too
are ways of concern; but these are all deficient modes, in which the possibilities of concem are kept to a 'bare minimum'. 2 The term 'concem'
has, in the first instance, its colloquiai [vorwissenschaftliche] signification,
and can mean to carry out something, to get it done [erIedigen], to
'straighten it out'. It can also mean to 'provide oneself with something'. 3
We use the expression with still another characteristic tum of phrase
when we say "1 am concemed for the success of the undertaking."4 Here
'concern' means something like apprehensiveness. In contrast to these
colloquiai ontical significations, the expression 'concem' will be used in
this investigation as an ontological term for an existentiale, and will designate the Being of a possible way of Being-in-the-world. This term has
been chosen not because Dasein happens to be proximally and to a large
extent 'practical' and economic, but because the Being of Dasein itse1f
l 'Besorgen'. AJJ Heidegger points out, he will use this term in a special sense which is to
be distinguished from many of its customary usages. We shaH, as a rule, translate it by
'concern', though this. is by no means an ~act equival~nt. The ~ngli~h word 'concern' is
used in many expressIOns where 'Besorgen would be mappropnate m German, such as
'This concerns you' 'That is my concern', 'He has an interest in several banking concerns'. 'Besorgen' s~ds rather for the kind of'concern' in which we 'concern ourselves'
with activities which we perform or things which we procure.
Z ' ••• a:Ie Modi des "Nur noch" in bezug auf Môglichkeiten des Besorgens.' The point
is that in these cases concern isjust barely ('nur noch') involved.
3 ' ••• sich etwas besorgen im Sinne von "sich etwas verschaffen".'
4 ' ••• ich besorge, dass das Unternehmen !llisslingt.' Here it is not diffic~l~ to find a
corresponding usage of 'concern', as our versIOn suggests. But the ana~o!p' lS/mperfect.
While we can say that we are 'concerned for the success of the enterprlSe or concerned
lest the enterprise should fail,' we w~uld hardly f?l1ow the German to the extent of
expressing 'concern that' the enterprlSe should fatl; nor would the German express
'Besorgen' at discovering that the enterprise has failed already.

57

84

Being and Time
I. 2
1
is to be made visible as care. This expression too is to be taken as an
ontological structural concept. (See Chapter 6 of this Division.) It has
nothing to do with 'tribulation', 'melancholy', or the 'cares oflife', though
ontically one can come across these in every Dasein. These-like their
opposites, 'gaiety' and 'freedom from care'-are ontically possible only
because Dasein, when understood ontologically, is care. Because Being-inthe-world belongs essentially to Dasein, its Being towards the world [Sein
zur Welt] is essentially concern.
From what we have been saying, it follows that Being-in is not a 'property' which Dasein sometimes has and sometimes does not have, and
without which it could be just as weIl as it could with it. It is not the case
that man 'is' and then has, by way of an extra, a relationship-of-Being
towards the 'world'-a world with which he provides himselfoccasionally. 2
Dasein is never 'proximally' an entity which is, so to speak, free from
Being-in, but which sometimes has the inclination to take up a 'relationship' towards the world. Taking up relationships towards the world is
possible only because Dasein, as Being-in-the-world, is as it is. This state of
Being does not arise just because some other entity is present-at-hand
outside ofDasein and meets up with it. Such an entity can 'meet up with'
Dasein only in so far as it can, ofits own accord, show itselfwithin a world.
Nowadays there is much talk about 'man's having an environment
[Umwelt]'; but this says nothing ontologically as long as this 'having' is
left indefinite. In its very possibility this 'having' is founded upon the
existential state of Being-in. Because Dasein is essentially an entity with
Being-in, it can explieitly discover those entities which it encounters
environmentaIly, it can know them, it can avail itself of them, it can have
the 'world'. To talk about 'having an environment' is ontically trivial,
but ontologically it presents a problem. To solve it requires nothing else
than defining the Being of Dasein, and doing so in a way which is onto10gicaIly adequate. Although this state of Being is one of which use has
made in biology, especiaIly since K. von Baer, one must not conelude
that its philosophical use implies 'biologism'. For the environment is a
structure which even biology as a positive science can never find and can
never define, but must presuppose and constantly"employ. Yet, even as an
a priori condition for the objects which biology takes for its theme, this
structure itself can be explained philosophically only if it has been conceived heforehand as a structure ofDasein. Only in terms ofan orientation
1 'Sorge'. The important etymological connection between 'Besorgen' ('concem') and
'Sorge' ('care') is lost in our translation. On 'Sorge' see especially Sections 41 and 42
below.
2 'Der Mensch "ist" nicht und hat überdies noch ein Seinsverhaltnis zur "Welt" die
er sich gelegentlich zule~t.'
'

J. 2

Being and Time

85

towards the ontological structure thus conceived can 'life' as astate
ofBeing be defined a priori, and this must be done in a privative manner. 1
Ontically as weIl as ontologically, the priority belongs to Being-in-the
world as concern. In the analytic of Dasein this structure undergoes a
basic Interpretation.
But have we not confined ourselves to negative assertions in aIl our
attempts to determine the nature of this state of Being? Though this
Being-in is supposedly so fundamental, we always keep hearing about
what it is not. Yes indeed. But there is nothing accidentaI about our
characterizing it predominantly in so negative a manner. In doing so we
have rather made known what is peculiar to this phenomenon, and our
characterization is therefore positive in a genuine sense-a sense appropriate to the phenomenon itself. When Being-in-the-world is exhibited
phenomenologically, disguises and concealments are rejected because this
phenomenon itself always gets 'seen' in a certain way in every Dasein.
And it thus gets 'seen' because it makes up a basic state of Dasein, and in
every case is already discIosed for Dasein's understanding of Being, and
discIosed along with that Being itself. But for the most part this phenomenon has been explained in a way which is basicaIly wrong, or interpreted in an ontologicaIly inadequate manner. On the other hand, this
'seeing in a certain way and yet for the most part wrongly explaining'
is itself based upon nothing else than this very state of Dasein's Being,
which is such that Dasein itself-and this means also its Being-in-the
world-gets its ontological understanding of itself in the first instance
from those entities which it itself is not but which it encounters 'within'
its world, and from the Being which they possess.
Both in Dasein and for it, this state of Being is always in sorne way
familial' [bekannt]. Now if it is also to become known [erkannt], the
knowing which such a task explicitly implies takes itself (as a knowing of
the world [WelterkennenJ) as the chief exemplification of the 'soul's'
relationship to the world. Knowing the world (voâv)-or rather addressing oneselfto the 'world' and discussing it (..\6yos)-thus functions as the
primary mode of Being-in-the-world, even though Being-in-the-world
does not as such get conceived. But because this structure of Being
remains ontologicaIly inaccessible, yet is experienced ontically as a 'relationship' between one entity (the world) and another (the soul), and
because one proximaIly understands Being by taking entities as entities
within-the-world for one's ontological foothold, one tries to conceive the
relationship between world and soul as grounded in these two entities
1 ' ••• auf dem Wege der Privation .. .' The point is that in order to understand life
merely as such, we must make abstraction from the fuller life ofDasein. See H. 50 above.

59

I. 2
themselves and in the meaning of their Being-namely, to conceive it as
Being-present-at-hand. And even though Being-in-the-world is something
of which one has pre-phenomenological experience and acquaintance
[erfahren und gekannt], it becomès invisible if one interprets it in a way
which is ontologically inappropriate. This state of Dasein's Being is now
one with which one is just barely acquainted (and indeed as something
obvious), with the stamp of an inappropriate interpretation. So in this
way it becomes the 'evident' point of departure for problems of epistemology or the 'metaphysics of knowledge'. For what is more obvious than
that a 'subject' is related to an 'Object' and vice versa? This 'subjectObject-relationship' must be presupposed. But while this presupposition
is unimpeachable in its facticity, this makes it indeed a baleful one, if its
ontological necessity and especially its ontological meaning are to be left
in the dark.
Thus the phenomenon of Being-in has for the most part been represented exclusively by a single exemplar-knowing the world., This has not
only been the case in epistemology; for even practical behaviour has been
understood as behaviour which is 'non-theoretical' and 'atheoretical'.
Because knowing has beengiven thispriority, our understanding ofits ownmost kind of Being gets led astray, and accordingly Being-in-the-world
must be exhibited even more precisely with regard to knowing the world,
and must itself be made visible as an existential 'modality' of Being-in.
86

Being and Time

~ 13. A Founded Mode in which Being-in is Exemplified. l Knowing the World.

60

IfBeing-in-the-world is a basic state ofDasein, and one in which Dasein
operates not only in general but pre-eminently in the mode of everydayness, then it must also be something which has always been experienced
onticaIly. It would be unintelligible for Being-in-the-world to remain
totally veiled from view, especially since Dasein has at its disposaI an
understanding of its own Being, no matter how indefinitely this understanding may function. But no sooner was the 'phenomenon of
knowing the world' grasped than it got interpreted in a 'superficial',
l'Die Exemplifizierung des In-Seins an einemfundierten Modus.' The conception of'founded'
modes is taken from Husserl, who introduces the concept of 'founding' in his Logische
Untersuchungen, vol. II, Part l, chapter 2 (second edition, Halle, 1913, p. 261). This
passage has been c10sely paraphrased as follows by Marvin Farber in his The Foundation
of Phenomenology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1943, p. 297; 'If in accordance with essential
law an a can only exist in a comprehensive unity which connects it with a p., then we
say, an a as such needs foundation through a p., or aIso, an a as such is in need of cornpletion by means of a p.. If accordingly ao , p.o are definite particular cases of the pure
genera a, or p., which stand in the cited relationship, and if they are memhers of one
whole, then we say that ao isfounded by p.o; and it is exclusiveQi founded by p.o if the need
of the completion of ao is alone satisfied by p.o. This terminology can he applied to the
species themselves; the equivocation is harmless.' Thus a founded mode of Being-in is
simply a mode which can subsist only when connected with something else.

I. 2
Being and Time
87
formaI manner. The evidence for this is the procedure (still customary
today) of setting up knowing as a 'relation between subject and Object'
-a procedure in which there lurks as much 'truth' as vacuity. But subject
and Object do not coincide with Dasein and the world.
Even if it were feasible to give an ontological definition of "Being-in"
primarily in terms of a Being-in-the-world which knows, itwould still be our
first task to show that knowing has the phenomenal character of a Being
which is in and towards the world. If one reflects upon this relationship of
Being, an entitycalled "Nature" is given proximallyas that which becomes
known. Knowing, as such, is not to be met in this entity. If knowing 'is' at
aIl, it belongs solely to those entities which know. But even in those entities,
human-Things, knowing is not present-at-hand. In any case, it is not
externally ascertainable as, let us say, bodily properties are. l Now, inasmuch as knowing belongs to these entities and is not sorne external
characteristic, it must be 'inside'. Now the more unequivocally one maintains that knowing is proximally and really 'inside' and indeed has by no
means the same kind of Being as entities which are both physical and
psychical, the less one presupposes when one believes that one is making
headway in the question of the essence of knowledge and in the clarification of the relationship between subject and Object. For only then can
the problem arise of how this knowing subject cornes out of its inner
'sphere' into one which is 'other and external', of how knowing can have
any object at all, and of how one must think of the object itself so that
eventually the subject knows it without needing to venture a leap into
another sphere. But in any of the numerous varieties which this approach
may take, the question of the kind of Being which belongs to this knowing
subject is left entirely unasked, though whenever its knowing gets handled,
its way of Being is already included tacitly in one's theme. Of course we
are sometimes assured that we are certainly not to think of the subject's
"inside" [Innen] and its 'inner sphere' as a sort of 'box' Gr 'cabinet'. But
when one asks for the positive signification of this 'inside' of immanence
in which knowing is proximally enclosed, or when one inquires how this
'Being inside' ["Innenseins"] which knowing possesses has its own character ofBeing grounded in the kind of Being which belongs to the subject,
then silence reigns. And no matter how this inner sphere may get interpreted, if one does no more than ask how knowing makes its way 'out of'
it and achieves 'transcendence', it becomes evident that the knowing
which presents such enigmas will remain problematical unless one has
previously clarified how it is and what it is.
l 'Injedem Falle ist est nicht so iiusserlich feststellbar wie etwa leibliche Eigenschaften.
The oider editions have'.•. nicht ist es .. .' and place a comma after 'feststellbar'.

6r

Being and Time
I. 2
With this kind of approach one remains blind to what is already
tacitly implied even when one takes the phenomenon of knowing as one's
theme in the most provisional manner: namely, that knowing is a mode
of Being of Dasein as Being-in-the-world, and is founded ontically upon
this state of Being. But if, as we suggest, we thus find phenomenally that
knowing is a kind of Being wmch belongs to Being-in-the-world, one might object
that with such an Interpretation of knowing, the problem of knowledge
is nullified; for what is left to be asked if one presupposes that knowing is
already 'alongside' its world, when it is not supposed to reach that world
except in the transcending of the subject? ln this question the constructivist 'standpoint', which has not been phenomenally demonstrated, again
comes to the fore; but quite apart from this, what higher court is to decide
whether and in what sense there is to be any problem of knowledge other
than that of the phenomenon of knowing as such and the kind of Being
which belongs to the knower?
If we now ask what shows itself in the phenomenal findings about
knowing, we must keep in mind that knowing is grounded beforehand
in a Being-already-alongside-the-world, which is essentially constitutive
for Dasein's Being. 1 Proximally, this Being-already-alongside is not jtist
a fixed staring at something that is purely present-at-hand. Being-in-theworld, as concern, is fascinated by the world with which it is concerned. 2
If knowing is to be possible as a way of determining the nature of the
present-at-hand by observing it, 3 then there must first be a deficiency in our
having-to-do with the world concernfully. When concern holds back
[SichenthaIten] from any kind of producing, manipulating, and the like
it puts itself into what is now the sole remaining mode of Being-in, th~
mode of just tarrying alongside.... [das Nur-noch-verweilen bei ...]
This kind of Being towards the worId is one which lets us encounter
entities within-the-world purely in the way they look (d8os), just that;
on the basis of this kind of Being, and as a mode of it, looking explicitly at
what we encounter is possible. 4 Looking at something in this way is sometime~ a definite way of ta~ing up a direction towards something--ofsetting
our slghts towards what IS present-at-hand. It takes over a 'view-point' in
advance from the entity which it encounters. Such looking-at enters the
88

l '• . • dass das .Erkennen selbst vorglingig gründet in einem Schon-sein-bei-der-Welt
ais welches das Sem von Dasein wesenhaft konstituiert.'
. '
2 'Das In-der-\":e!t-sein ist ais Besorgen von der besorgten Welt benommen.' Here we
follow the older edltlOns. The newer editions have 'das Besorgen' instead of 'ais Besorgen'
8'D .
.
amlt Erkennen ais betra~~tendes Bestimmen des Vorhandenen moglich sei .. .'
Here too we follow the older editlons. The newer editions again have 'das' instead of 'ais'.
4 'Auf ~em ~runde dieser Seinsart zur Welt, die das innerweltlich begegnende Seiende
!lur .noch m sem~m pUrl;n Aussehen (.mo.) begegnen Hi.sst, und als Modus dieser Seinsart
l.5t em ausdruckhches Hmsehen aufdas so Begenende moglich.'

I. 2

Being and Time

89

mode of dwelling autonomously alongside entities within-the-world. 1 ln
this kind of 'dwelling' as a holding-oneself-back from any manipulation or
utilization, the perception of the present-at-hand is consummated. 2 Perception is consummated when one addresses oneself to something as something and discusses it as such. 3 This amounts to interpretation in the broadest
sense; and on the basis of such interpretation, perception becomes an act
of making determinate. 4 What is thus perceived and made determinate can
be expressed in propositions, and can be retained and preserved as what
has thus been asserted. This perceptive retention of an assertion li about
something is itself a way of Being-in-the-world; it is not to be Interpreted
as a 'procedure' by which a subject provides itself with representations
[Vorstellungen] of something which remain stored up 'inside' as having
been thus appropriated, and with regard to which the question of how
they 'agree' with actuality can occasionally arise.
When Dasein directs itself towards something and grasps it, it does not
somehow first get out of an inner sphere in which it has been proximally
encapsulated, but its primary kind of Being is such that it is always
'outside' alongside entities which it encounters and which belong to a
world already discovered. Nor is any inner sphere abandoned when
Dasein dwells alongside the entity to be known, and determines its character; but even in this 'Being-outside' alongside the object, Dasein is still
'inside', ifwe understand this in the correct sense; that is to say, it is itself
'inside' as a Being-in-the-world which knows. And furthermore, the
perceiving ofwhat is known is not a process ofreturning with one's booty
to the 'cabinet' of consciousness after one has gone out and grasped it;
even in perceiving, retaining, and preserving, the Dasein which knows
remains outside, and it does so as Dasein. If l 'merely 'know [Wissen] about
some way in which the Being of entities is interconnected, if l 'only'
represent them, if l 'do no more' than 'think' about them, 1 am no less
l 'Solches Hinsehen kommt selbst in den Modus eines eigenstandigen Sichaufhaltens
bei dem innerweltlichen Seienden.'
2 'In sogerateten "Aufenthalt"-als dem Sichenthalten von jeglicher Hantierung and
Nutzung-vollzieht sich das Vemehmen des Vorhandenen.' The word 'Aufenthalt' normally means a stopping-off at sorne place, a sojourn, an abiding, or even an abode or dwelling. Here the author is exploiting the fact that it includes both the prefixes 'auf-' and
'ent-', which we find in the verbs 'aufhalten' and 'enthalten'. 'Aufhalten' means to hold
something at a stage which it has reached, to arrest it, to stop it; when used refiexive1y it
can mean to stay at a place, to dwell there. While 'enthalten' usually means to contain,
it preserves its more literai meaning of holding back or refraining, when it is used refiexive1y. Ali these meanings are presumably packed into the word 'Aufenthalt' as used
here, and are hardly suggested by our 'd~elling'.
8 'Das Vernehmen hat die Vollzugsàrt des Ansprechens und Besprechens von etwas ais
etwas.' On 'something as something' see Section 32 be10w (H. 149), where 'interpretation'
is also discussed.
4 ' ••• wird das Vernehmen zum Bestimmen.'
5 'Aussa~e'. For further discussion see Section 33 be1ow.

62

go
Being and Time
I. 2
alongside the entities outside in the world than when 1 originally grasp
them. 1 Even the forgetting of something, in which every relationship of
Being towards what one formerly knew has seemingly been obliterated,
must be conceived as a modification of the primordial Being-in; and this holds
for every delusion and for every error.
We have now pointed out how those modes of Being-in-the-world
which are constitutive for knowing the world are interconnected in their
foundations; this makes it plain that in knowing, Dasein achieves a new
status of Being [Seinsstand] towards a world which has already been discovered in Dasein itself. This new possibility of Being can develop itself
autonomously; it can become a task to be accomplished, and as scientific
knowledge it can take over the guidance for Being-in-the-world. But a
'commercium' of the subject with a world does not get created for the first
time by knowing, nor does it arise from some way in which the world acts
upon a subject. Knowing is a mode of Dasein founded upon Being-in-theworld. Thus Being-in-the-world, as a basic state, must be Interpreted
hiforehand.
l ' .•• bei einem originiiren Erfassen.'

III
THE WORLDHOOD OF THE WORLD
~ r 4. The Idea

of the Worldhood of the World1 in General

BEING-IN-THE-WORLD shaH first be made visible with regard to that
item of its structure which is the 'world' itself. To accomplish this task
seems easy and so trivial as to make one keep taking for granted that it
may be dispensed with. What can be meant by describing 'the world' as
a phenomenon? It means to let us see what shows itselfin 'entities' within
the world. Here the first step is to enumerate the things that are 'in' the
world: houses, trees, people, mountains, stars. We can depict the way such
entities 'look', and we can give an account of occurrences in them and with
them. This, however, is obviously a pre-phenomenological 'business'
which cannot be at aH relevant phenomenologically. Such a description is
always confined to entities. It is ontical. But what we are seeking is Being.
And we have formaHy defined 'phenomenon' in the phenomenological
sense as that which shows itself as Being and as a structure of Being.
Thus, to give a phenomenological description of the 'world' will mean
to exhibit the Being of those entities which are present-at-hand within
the world, and to fix it in concepts which are categorial. Now the entities
within the world are Things-Things of Nature, and Things 'invested
with value' [cewertbehaftete" Dinge]. Their Thinghood becomes a
problem; and to the extent that the Thinghood ofThings 'invested with
value' is based upon the Thinghood of Nature, our primary theme is
the Being of Things of Nature-Nature as such. That characteristic of
Being which belongs to Things of Nature (substances), and upon which
l 'Welt', 'we1tlich', 'We1tlichkeit', 'We1tmiissigkeit'. We shaH usually translate 'Welt'
as 'the world' or 'a world', foHowing English idiom, though Heidegger frequently omits
the article when he wishes to refer to 'We1t' as a 'characteristic' of Dasein. In ordinary
German the adjective 'weltlich' and the derivative noun 'We1tlichkeit' have much the
same connotations as the English 'worldly' and 'worldliness'; but the meanings which
Heidegger assigns to them (H. 65) are quite different from those of their English cognates.
At the risk of obscuring the etymological connection and occasionally misleading the
reader, we shaH translate 'we1tlich' as 'worldly', 'We1tlichkeit' as 'worldhood', and
'Weltmiissigkeit' as 'worldly character'. The reader must hear in mind, however, that
there is no suggestion here of the 'worldlinesa' of the 'man of the world'.

63

Being and Time
1. 3
everything is founded, is substantiality. What is its ontological meaning?
By asking this, we have given an unequivocal direction to our inquiry.
But is this a way of asking ontologically about the 'world'? The
problematic which we have thus marked out is one which is undoubtedly
ontological. But even if this ontology should itself succeed in explicating
the Being of Nature in the very purest manner, in conformity with the
basic assertions about this entity, which the mathematical natural
sciences provide, it will never reach the phenomenon that is the 'world'.
Nature is itself an entity which is encountered within the world and
which can be discovered in various ways and at various stages.
Should we then first attach ourselves to those entities with which
Dasein proximally and for the most part dwells-Things 'invested with
value' ? Do not these 'really' show us the world in which we live? Perhaps,
in fact, they show us something like the 'world' more penetratingly. But
these Things too are entities 'within' the world.
Neither the ontital depittion of entities within-the-world nor the ontological
Interpretation of their Being is such as to reach the phenomenon of the 'world.' ln
both ofthese ways ofaccess to 'Objective Being', the 'world' has already
been 'presupposed', and indeed in various ways.
Is it possible that ultimately we cannot address ourselves to 'the world'
as determining the nature of the entity we have mentioned? Yet we caU
this entity one which is "within-the-world". Is 'world' perhaps a characteristic ofDasein's Being? And in that case, does every Dasein 'proximally'
have its world? Does not 'world' thus become something 'subjective'?
How, then, can there be a 'common' world 'in' which, nevertheless, we
are? And if we raise the question of the 'world', what world do we have in
view? Neither the common world nor the subjective wOrld, but the worldhood of the world as such. By what avenue do we meet this phenomenon?
'Worldhood' is an ontological concept, and stands for the structure of
one of the constitutive items of Being-in-the-world. But we know Beingin-the-world as a way in which Dasein's character is defined existentially.
Thus worldhood itself is an existentiale. If we inquire ontologically about
the 'world', we by no means abandon the analytic of Dasein as a field for
thematic study. Ontologically, 'world' is not a way of characterizing those
entities which Dasein essentially is not; it is rather a characteristic of
Dasein itself. This does not rule out the possibility that when we investigate the phenomenon of the 'world' we must do so by the avenue of
entities within-the-world and the Being which they possess. The task of
'describing' the world phenomenologically is so far from obvious that even
if we do no more than determine adequately what form it shall take,
essential ontological clarifications will be needed.
92

64

I. 3
Being and Time
93
This discussion of the word 'world', and our frequent use ofit have made
it apparent that it is used in several ways. By unravelling these we can get
an indication of the different kinds of phenomena that are signified. and
of the way in which they are interconnected.
I. "World" is used as an ontical concept, and signifies the totality of
those entities which can be present-at-hand within the world.
2. "World" functions as an ontological term, and signifies the Being
of those entities which we have just mentioned. And indeed 'world' cao
become a term for any realm which encompasses a multiplicity of entities :
for instance, when one talks of the 'world' of a mathematician. 'world'
signifies the realm of possible objects of mathematics.
3. "World" can be understood in another omical sense-not. however.
as those entities which Dasein essentially is not and which cao be encountered within-the-world. but rather as that 'wherein' a factical Dasein
as such can be said to 'live'. "World" has herea pre-ontological existentiell
signification. Here again there are different possibilities: "world" may stand
for the 'public' we-world, or one's 'own' closest (domestic) environment. 1
4. Finally, "world" designates the ontologico-existential concept of
worldhood. Worldhood itself may have as its modes whatever structural
wholes any special 'worlds' may have at the time; but it embraces in itself
the a priori character of worldhood in general. We shall reserve the
expression "world" as a term for our third signification. If we should
sometimes use it in the first of these senses, we shall mark this with
single quotation marks.
The derivative form 'worldly' will then apply terminologically to a
kind of Being which belongs to Dasein, never to a kind which belongs to
entities present-at-hand 'in' the world. We shall designate these latter
entities as "belonging to the world" or "within-the-world" [weltzugehôrig oder innerweltlich].
A glance at previous ontology shows that if one fails to see Being-inthe-world as a state of Dasein, the phenomenon of worldhood likewise
gets passed over. One tries instead to Interpret the world in terms of the
Being of those entities which are present-at-hand within-the-world but
which are by no means proximally discovered-namely, in terms of
Nature. If one understands Nature ontologico-categorially, one finds that
1'. . . die "eigene" und niichste (hiiusliche) Umwelt.' The word 'Umwelt', which is
customarily translated as 'environment', means literally the 'world around' or the 'world
about'. The prefix 'um-', however, not only may mean 'around' or 'about', but, as we
shall see, ca~.also be us,ed in .an expr~ssion such as 'um zu .. .', which is most easily
translated as III order to . SectIOn 15 Will be largely devoted to a study ofseveral words in
which this same prefix occurs, though this is by no means apparent in the words we have
chosen to represent them: 'Umgang' ('dealings'); 'das Um-zu' ('the "in-order-to" ').
'Umsicht' ('circumspection').
'

65

66

94
Being and Time
I. 3
Nature is a limiting case of the Being of possible entities within-the-world.
Only in sorne definite mode of its own Being-in-the-world can Dasein
discover entities as Nature. 1 This manner of knowing them has the
character of depriving the world of its worldhood in a definite way.
'Nature', as the categorial aggregate of those structures of Being which a
definite entity encountered within-the-world may possess, can never make
worldhood intelligible. But even the phenomenon of 'Nature', as it is
conceived, for instance, in romanticism, can be grasped ontologically only
in terms of the concept of the world-that is to say, in terms of the
analytic of Dasein.
When it cornes to the problem of analysing the world's worldhood ontologically, traditional ontology operates in a blind alley, if, indeed, it sees
this problem at all. On the other hand, if we are to Interpret the worldhood of Dasein and the possible ways in which Dasein is made worldly
[Verweltlichung], we must show why the kind of Being with which Dasein
knows the world is such that it passes over the phenomenon ofworldhood
both ontically and ontologically. But at the same time the very Fact of
this passing-over suggests that we must take special precautions to get the
right phenomenal point of departure [Ausgang] for access [Zugang] to
the phenomenon ofworldhood, so that it will not get passed over.
Our method has already been assigned [Anweisung]. The theme of
our analytic is to be Being-in-the-world, and accordingly the very world
itself; and these are to be considered within the horizon of average everydayness-the kind of Being which is closest to Dasein. We must make a
study of everyday Being-in-the-world; with the phenomenal support
which this gives us, something like the world must come into view.
That world of everyday Dasein which is closest to it, is the environment.
From this existential character of average Being-in-the-world, our
investigation will take its course [Gang] towards the idea of worldhood
in general. We shall seek the worldhood of the environment (environmentality) by going through an ontological Interpretation ofthose entities
within-the-environment which we encounter as closest to us. The expression
"environment" [Umwelt] contains in the 'environ' ["um"] a suggestion
ofspatiality. Yet the 'around' ["Umherum"] which is constitutive for the
environment does not have a primarily 'spatial' meaning. Instead, the
spatial character which incontestably belongs to any environment, can be
clarified only in terms of the structure of worldhood. From this point of
view, Dasein's spatiality, ofwhich we have given an indication in Section
12, becomes phenomenally visible. In ontology, however, an attempt has
l 'Das Seiende aIs Natur kaon das Dasein nur in einem bestimmten Modus seines Inder-Welt-seÏDs entdecken.'

I. 3
Being and Time
95
been made to start with spatiality and then to Interpret the Being of the
'world' as res extensa. In Descartes we find the most extreme tendency
towards such an ontology of the 'world', with, indeed, a counter-orientation towards the res cogitans-which does not coincide with Dasein either
ontically or ontologically. The analysis of worldhood which we are here
attempting can be made clearer if we show how it differs from such an
ontological tendency. Our analysis will be completed in three stages:
(A) the analysis of environmentality and worldhood in general; (B) an
illustrative contrast between our analysis of worldhood and Descartes'
ontology of the 'world'; (C) the aroundness [das Umhafte] of the environment, and the 'spatiality' of Dasein. 1

A. Ana(ysis of Environmentality and Worldhood in General

1f 15· The Being of the Entities Encountered in the Environment
The Being of those entities which we encounter as closest to us can be
exhibited phenomenologically if we take as our clue our everyday Beingin-the-world, which we also caU our "dealings"2 in the world and with
entities within-the-world. Such dealings have already dispersed themselves
into manifold ways of concern. 3 The kind of dealing which is closest to us
is as we have shown, not a bare perceptual cognition, but rather that
kind of concern which manipulates things and puts them to use; and this
has its own kind of 'knowledge'. The phenomenological question applies
in the first instance to the Being of those entities which we encounter in
such concern. To assure the kind ofseeing which is here required, we must
first make a remark about method.
In the disclosure and explication ofBeing, entities are in every case our
preliminary and our accompanying theme [das Vor-und Mitthematische] ;
but our real theme is Being. In the domam of the present analysis, the
entities we shall take as our preliminary theme are those which show themselves in our concern with the environment. Such entities are not thereby
objects for knowing the 'world' theoretically; they are simply what gets
used, what gets produced, and so forth. As entities so encountered, they
become the preliminary theme for the purview of a 'knowing' which, as
phenomenological, looks primarily towards Being, and which, in thus
taking Being as its theme, takes these entities as its accompanying theme.
This phenomenological interpretation is accordingly not a way ofknowing
1 Ais considered in Sections 15-18; B in Sections 19-21; C in Sections 22-24.
Il 'Umgang'. This word means literally a 'going around' or 'going about', in a sense not

too far removed from what we have in mind when we say that someone is 'going about his
businèss'. 'Dealings' is by no means an accurate translation, but is perhaps as convenient
as any. 'Intercourse' and 'trafficking' are also possible translations.
8 See above, H. 57, n. l, p. 83.

68

96
Being and Time
I. 3
those characteristics of entities which themselves are [seiender Beschaffenheiten des Seienden]; it is rather a determination of the structure of
the Being which entities possess. But as an investigation of Being, it brings
to completion, autonomously and explicitly, that understanding of Being
which belongs already to Dasein and which 'cornes alive' in any of its
dealings with entities. Those entities which serve phenomenologically as
our preliminary theme-in this case, those which are used or which are
to be found in the course of production-become accessible when wc put
ourselves into the position of concerning ourselves with them in sorne
such way. Taken strictly, this talk about "putting ourselves into such a
position" [Sichversetzen] is misleading; for the kind of Being which
belongs to such concernful dealings is not one into which we need to put
ourselves first. This is the way in which everyday Dasein always is: when
1 open the door, for instance, 1 use the latch. The achieving of phenomenological access to the entities which we encounter, consists rather in
thrusting aside our interpretative tendencies, which keep thrusting themselves upon us and running along with us, and which conceal not only the
phenomenon ofsuch 'concern', but even more those entities themselves as
encountered of their own accord in our concern with them. These entangling errors become plain if in the course of our investigation we now ask
which entities shall be taken as our preliminary theme and established as
the pre-phenomenal basis for our study.
One may answer: "Things." ,But with this obvious answer we have
perhaps already missed the pre-phenomenal basis we are seeking. For in
addressing these entities as 'Things' (Tes), we have tacitly anticipated
their ontological character. When analysis starts with such entities and
goes on to inquire about Being, what it meets is Thinghood and Reality.
Ontological explication discovers, a;s it proceeds, such characteristics of
Being as substantiality, materiality, extendedness, side-by-side-ness, and
so forth. But even pre-ontologicalIy, in such Being as this, the entities
which we encounter in concern are proximally hidden. When one designates Things as the entities that are 'proximally given', one goes onto10gically astray, even though ontically one has something else in mind.
What one really has in mind remains undetermined. But suppose one
characterizes these 'Things' as Things 'invested with value'? What does
"value" mean ontologicalIy? How are we to categorize this 'investing'
and Being-invested? Disregarding the obscurity of this structure of
investiture with value, have we thus met that phenomenal characteristic
of Being which belongs to what we encounter in our concernful dealings?
The Greeks had an appropriate term for 'Things' : 1I'paYf.La'Ta-that is
to say, that which one has to do with in one's concernful dealings

Being and Time
97
(1I'pâg,s). But ontologically, the specifically 'pragmatic' character of
the 1I'paYf.La'Ta is just what the Greeks left in obscurity; they thought of
these 'proximalIy' as 'mere Things'. We shall calI those entities which we
encounter in concern "equipment".l ln our dealings we come across
equipment for writing, sewing, working, transportation, measurement.
The kind of Being which equipment possesses must be exhibited. The
clue for doing this lies in our first defining what makes an item of equipment-namely, its equipmentality.
Taken strictly, there 'is' no such thing as an equipment. To the Being
of any equipment there always belongs a totality of equipment, in which
it can be this equipment that it is. Equipment is essentially 'something
in-order-to •. .' ["etwas um-zu .. ."]. A totality of equipment is constituted
by various ways of the 'in-order-to', such as serviceability, conduciveness,
usability, manipulability.
ln the 'in-order-to' as a structure there lies an assignment or Tefereru;e of
something to something. 2 Only in the analyses which are to follow can
the phenomenon which this term 'assignment' indicates be made visible
in its ontological genesis. ProvisionalIy, it is enough to take a look
phenomenally at a manifold of such assignments. Equipment-in accordance with its equipmentality-always is in terms of [aus] its belonging to
other equipment: ink-stand, pen, ink, paper, blotting pad, table, lamp,
furniture, windows, doors, room. These 'Things' never show themselves

I. 3

l 'das Zeug'. The word 'Zeug' has no precise English equivalent. While it may ~ean any
implement, instrument, or tocl, Heidegger uses it for the most part as a collective noun
which is analogous to our relatively specifie 'gear' (as in 'gear for fishing') or the more
elaborate 'paraphernalia', or the still more general 'equipment', which we shall employ
throughout this translation. In this collective sense 'Zeug' can sometimes be used in a way
which is comparable to the use of 'stuff' in such sentences as 'there is plenty of stuff lying
around'. (See H. 74.) In general, however, this pejorative connotation is lacking. For the
most part Heidegger ~ses the term as a ~ollectiye nou~, so that ~e can ~ay th~t ther~ is no
such thing as 'an eqUipment'; but he still uses It occaslOnally wlth an mdefimte article to
refer to sorne specifie tool or instrument-sorne item or bit of equipment.
Il 'In der Struktur "Um-zu" liegt eine Verweisung von etwas auf etwas.' There is no close
English equivalent for the word 'Verweisung', which occurs many times in this chapter.
The basic metaphor seems to be that of turning something away towards something else,
or painting it away, as when one 'refers' or 'commits' or 'relegates' or 'assigns' something
to something eIse, whether one 'refers' a symbol to what it symbolizes, 'refers' a beggar
to a welfare agency, 'commits' a person for trial, 'relegates' or 'banishes' him to Siberia,
or even 'assigns' equipment to a purpose for which it is to be used. 'Verweisung' thus does
sorne of the work of 'reference', 'commitment', 'assignment', 'relegation', 'banishment'j
but it does not do ail the work of any of these expressions. For a businessman to 'refer' to
a letter, for a symbol to 'refer' to what it symbolizes, for a man to 'commit larceny or
murder' or merely to 'commit himself' to certain partisan views, for a teacher to give a
pupil a long 'assignment' or even for a journalist to receive an 'assignment' to the Vatican,
we would have to find ~ome other verb than 'verweisen'. We shall, however, use the
verbs 'assign' and 'refer' and their derivatives as perhaps the least misleading substitutes,
employing whichever seems the more appropriate in the context, and occasionally using
a hendiadys as in the present passage. See Section 17 for further discussion. (When other
words such as 'anweisen' or 'zuweisen' are translated as 'assign', we shall usually subjoin
the German in brackets.)

69

98
Being and Time
I. 3
proximally as they are for themselves, so as to add up to a sum of realia
and fill up a room. What we encounter as closest to us (though not as
something taken as a theme) is the room; and we encounter it not
as something 'between four walls' in a geometrical spatial sense, but as
equipment for residing. Out of this the 'arrangement' emerges, and it is
in this that any 'individual' item of equipment shows itself. Before it does
so, a totality of equipment has already been discovered.
Equipment can genuinely show itself ooly in dealings cut to its own
measure (hammering with a hammer, for example); but in such dealings
an entity of this kind is not grasped thematically as an occurring Thing,
nor is the equipment-structure known as such even in the using. The
hammering does not simply have knowledge about [um] the hammer's
character as equipment, but it has appropriated this equipment in a way
which could not possibly be more suitable. In dealings such as this, where
sometQing is put to use, our concem subordinates itself to the "in-orderto" which is constitutive for the equipment we are employing at the time;
the less we just stare at the hammer-Thing, and the more we seize hold
of it and use it, the more primordial does our relationship to it become,
and the more unveiledly is it encountered as that which it is-as equipment. The hammering itself uncovers the specific 'manipulability'
["Handlichkeit"] of the hammer. The kind of Being which equipment
possesses-in which it manifests itself in its own right-we calI "readinessto-hand" [Zuhandenheit].1 Ooly because equipment has this 'Being-initself' and does not merely occur, is it manipulable in the broadest sense
and at our disposaI. No matter how sharply we just look [Nur-nochhinsehen] at the 'outward appearance' ["Aussehen]" of Things in whatever
form this takes, we cannot discover anything ready-to-hand. If we look
at Things just 'theoretically', we can get along without understanding
readiness-to-hand. But when we deal with them by using them and manipulating them, this activity is not a blind one; it has its own kind of sight,
by which our manipulation is guided and from which it acquires its
specific Thingly character. Dealings with equipment subordinate themselves to the manifold assignments of the 'in-order-to'. And the sight with
which they thus accommodate themselves is circumspection. 2
1 1talics only in earlier edi tions.
li The word 'Umsicht', which we translate by 'circumspection', is here presented as
standing for a special kind of 'Sicht' ('sight'). Here, as elsewhere, Heidegger is taking
advantage of the fact that the prefix 'um' may mean either 'around' or 'in order to'.
'Umsicht' may accordingly be thought of as meaning 'looking around' or 'looking around
for something' or 'looking around for a way to get something done'. In ordinary German
usage, 'Umsicht' seems to have much the same connotation as our 'circumspection'-a
kind of awareness in which one looks around before one decides just what one ought to
do next. But Heidegger seems to he generalizing this notion as weIl as calling attention to

1. 3
Being and Time
99
'Practical' behaviour is not 'atheoretical' in the sense of "sightlessness".1
The way it differs from theoretical behaviour does not lie simply in the
fact that in theoretical behaviour one observes, while in practical behaviour one acts [gehandelt wird], and that action must employ theoretical
cognition ifit is not to remain blind; for the fact that observation is a kind
of concem is just as primordial as the fact that action has its own kind of
sight. Theoretical behaviour is just looking, without circumspection. But
the fact that this looking is non-circumspective does not mean that it
follows no rules: it constructs a canon for itself in the form of method.
The ready-to-hand is not grasped theoretically at all, nor is it itself
the sort of thing that circumspection takes proximally as a circumspective
theme. The peculiarity of what is proximally ready-to-hand is that, in
its readiness-to-hand, it must, as it were, withdraw [zurückzuziehen] in
order to be ready-to-hand quite authentically. That with which our everyday dealings proximally dwell is not the tools themselves [die Werkzeuge
selbst]. On the contrary, that with which we concem ourselves primarily
is the work-that which is to be produced at the time; and this is accordingly ready-to-hand too. The work bears with it that referential totality
within which the equipment is encountered. 2
The work to be produced, as the "towards-which" of such things as the
hammer, the plane, and the needle, likewise has the kind of Being that
helongs to equipment. The shoe which is to be produced is for wearing
(footgear) [Schuhzeug]; the dock is manufactured for telling the time.
The work which we chiefly encounter in our concemful dealings-the
work that is to be found when one is "at work" on something [das in
Arbeit befindliche]-has a usability which belongs to it essentially; in
this usability it lets us encounter already the "towards-which" for which
it is usable. A work that someone has ordered [das bestellte Werk] i s only
by reason of its use and the assignment-context of entities which is discovered in using it.
But the work to be produced is not merely usable for something. The
the extent to which circumspection in the narrower sense occurs in our every-day living.
(The distinction between 'sight' (Sicht') and 'seeing' ('Sehen') will be developed further
in Sections 31 and 36 below.)
l ' ••• im Sinne der Sichtlosigkeit .. .' The point of this sentence will be clear to the
reader who recaIls that the Greek verb 6€wpâv, from which the words 'theoretical' and
'atheoretical' are derived, originally meant 'to see'. Heidegger is pointing out that this is
not what we have in mind in the traditional contrast between the 'theoretical' and the
'practical'•
li 'Das Werk triigt die Verweisungsganzheit, innerhalb derer das Zeug begegnet.' ln
this chapter the word 'Werk' ('work') usuaIly refers to the product achieved by working
rather than to the process ofworking as such. We shaIl as a rule translate 'Verweisungsganzheit' as 'referential totality', though sometimes the clumsier 'totality of assignments'
may convey the idea more effectively. (The older editions read 'deren' rather than
'derer'.)

70

Being and Time
I. 3
production itself is a using of something for something. In the work there
is also a reference or assignment to 'materiaIs': the work is dependent on
[angewiesen auf] leather, thread, needles, and the like. Leather, moreover is produced from hides. These are taken from animais, which someone
else has raised. Animais also occur within the world without having been
raised at aIl; and, in a way, these entities still produce themselves even
when they have been raised. So in the environment certain entities become
accessible which are always ready-to-hand, but which, in themselves, do
not need to be produced. Hammer, tongs, and needle, refer in themselves
to steel, iron, metal, mineraI, wood, in that they consist of these. In equipment that is used, 'Nature' is discovered along with it by that use-the
'Nature' we find in naturaI products.
.
Here, however, "Nature" is not to be understood as that which is just
present-at-hand, nor as the power of Nature. The wood is a forest of timber,
the mountain a quarry of rock; the river is water-power, the wind is wind
'in the sails'. As the 'environment' is discovered, the 'Nature' thus discovered is encountered too. If its kind of Being as ready-to-hand is disregarded, this 'Nature' itself can be discovered and defined simply in its
pure presence-at-hand. But when this happens, the Nature which 'stirs
and strives', which assails us and enthralls us as landscape, remains
hidden. The botanist's plants are not the flowers of the hedgerow; the
'source' which the geographer establishes for a river is not the 'springhead
in the daIe'.
The work produced refers not only to the "towards-which" of its
usability and the "whereof" of which it consists: under simple craft
conditions it also has an assignment to the person who is to use it or wear
it. The work is cut to his figure; he 'is' there along with it as the work
emerges. Even when goods are produced by the dozen, this constitutive
assignment is by no means lacking; it is mereIy indefinite, and points to
the random, the average. Thus along with the work, we encounter not
only entities ready-to-hand but also entities with Dasein's kind ofBeingentities for which, in their concern, the product becomes ready-to-hand;
and together with these we encounter the world in which wearers and users
live, which is at the same time ours. Any work with which one concerns
oneself is ready-to-hand not only in the domestic world of the workshop
but also in the public world. Along with the public world, the environing
Nature [die Umweltnatur] is discovered and is accessible to everyone. In
roads, streets, bridges, buildings, our concern discovers Nature as having
sorne definite direction. A covered railway platform takes account of bad
weather; an installation for public lighting takes account of the darkness,
or rather of specifie changes in the presence or absence of daylight-the
100

J. 3
Being and Time
101
'position of the sun'. In a dock, account is taken of sorne definite constellation in the world-system. When we look at the dock, we tacitly make
use of the 'sun's position', in accordance with which the measurement of
cime gets regulated in the official astronomical manner. When we make
use of the cIock-equipment, which is proximally and inconspicuously
ready-to-hand, the environing Nature is ready-to-hand along with it. Our
concernful absorption in whatever work-world lies cIosest to us, has a
function of discovering; and it is essential to this function that, depending
upon the way in which we are absorbed, those entities within-the-world
which are brought along [beigebrachte] in the work and with it (that is
to say, in the assignments or references which are constitutive for it)
remain discoverable in varying degrees of explicitness and with a varying
circumspective penetration.
The kind of Being which beIongs to these entities is readiness-to-hand.
But this characteristic is not to be understood as merely a way of taking
them, as if we were talking such 'aspects' into the 'entities' which we
proximally encounter, or as if sorne world-stuff which is proximally
present-at-hand in itseIfl were 'given subjective colouring' in this way.
Such an Interpretation would overlook the fact that in this case these
entities would have to be understood and discovered beforehand as
something purely present-at-hand, and must have priority and take the
lead in the sequence ofthose dealings with the 'world' in which something
is discovered and made one's own. But this aIready runs counter to the
ontological meaning of cognition, which we have exhibited as a founded
mode of Being-in-the-world. 2 To lay bare what is just present-at-hand
and no more, cognition must first penetrate beyond what is ready-to-hand
in our concern. Readiness-to-hand is the way in which entities as they are 'in
themselves' are defined ontologico-categorially. Yet only by reason of something
present-at-hand, 'is there' anything ready-to-hand. Does it follow, however, granting this thesis for the nonce, that readiness-to-hand is ontologically founded upon presence-at-hand?
But even if, as our ontological Interpretation proceeds further, readiness-to-hand should prove itself to be the kind of Being characteristic of
those entities which are proximally discovered within-the-world, and
even if its primordiality as compared with pure presence-at-hand can be
demonstrated, have aIl these explications been of the slightest help towards understanding the phenomenon of the world ontologicaIly? In
Interpreting these entities within-the-world, however, we have always
1'••. ein zünachst an sich vorhandener We1tstoff .. .' The earlier editions have '•••
~unachst ein an sich vorhandener We1tstoff .• .'.
Il See H. 61 above.

Being and Time
J.3
'presupposed' the world. Even ifwe join them together, we still do not get
anything like the 'world' as their sumo If, then, we start with the Being of
these entities, is there any avenue that will lead us to exhibiting the
phenomenon of the world?l
102

~ 16. How the Worldry Charaeter of the Environment Announces itself in Entities

73

Within-the-world 1
The world itself is not an entity within-the-world j and yet it is so
determinative for such entities that only in so far as 'there is' a world can
they be encountered and show themselves, in their Being, as entities
which have been discovered. But in what way 'is there' a world? If
Dasein is onticaIly constituted by Being-in-the-World, and if an understanding of the Being of its Self belongs just as essentiaIly to its Being, no
matter how indefinite that understanding may be, then does not Dasein
have an understanding of the world-a pre-ontological understanding,
which indeed can and does get along without explicit ontological insights ?
With those entities which are encountered within-the-world-that is to
say, with their character as within-the-world-does not something like
the world show itself for concernful Being-in-the-world? Do we not have
a pre-phenomenological glimpse of this phenomenon? Do we not always
have such a glimpse of it, without having to take it as a theme for ontological Interpretation? Ras Dasein itself, in the range of its concernful
absorption in equipment ready-to-hand, a possibility of Being in which
the worldhood of those entities within-the-world with which it is concerned is, in a certain way, lit up for it, along with those entities themselves?
If such possibilities of Being for Dasein can be exhibited within its
concernful dealings, then the way lies open for studying the phenomenon
which is thus lit up, and for attempting to 'hold it at bay', as it were, and
to interrogate it as to those structures which show themselves therein.
To the everydayness of Being-in-the-world there belong certain modes
of concern. These permit the entities with which we concern ourselves to
be encountered in such a way that the worldly character ofwhat is withinthe-world cornes to the fore. When we concern ourselves with something,
the entities which are most c10sely ready-to-hand may be met as something
unusable, not properly adapted for the use we have decided upon. The
tool turns out to be damaged, or the material unsuitable. In each of these
cases equipment is here, ready-to-hand. We discover its unusability, however, not by looking at it and establishing its properties, but rather by the
circumspection of the dealings in which we use it. When its unusability is
thus discovered, equipment becomes conspicuous. This eonspicuousness
l

'Die am innerweltlich Seienden sich meldende Weltmiissigkeit der Umwelt.'

I. 3
Being and Time
103
presents the ready-to-hand equipment as in a certain un-readiness-tohand. Butthis implies that what cannot be used just lies therej it shows
itself as an equipmental Thing which looks so and so, and which, in its
readiness-to-hand as looking that way, has constantly been present-athand too. Pure presence-at-hand announces itself in slich equipment,
but only to withdraw to the readiness-to-hand of something with which
one concerns oneself-that is to say, of the sort of thing we find when we
put it back into repair. This presence-at-hand of something that cannot
be used is still not devoid of aIl readiness-to-hand whatsoeverj eqùipment
which is present-at-hand in this way is still not just a Thing which occurs
somewhere. The damage to the equipment is still not a mere alteration of
a Thing-not a change of properties which just occurs in something
present-at-hand.
In our concernful dealings, however, we not only come up against
unusable things within what is ready-to-hand already: we also find things
which are missing~which not only are not 'handy' ["handlich"] but
are not 'to hand' ["zur Rand"] at aIl. Again, to miss something in
this way amounts to coming across something un-ready-to-hand. When we
notice what is un-ready-to-hand, that which i s ready-to-hand enters
the mode of obtrusiveness The more urgently [Je dringlicher] we need what
is missing, and the more authenticaIly it is encountered in its un-readinessto-hand, aIl the more obtrusive \[um so aufdringlicher] does that which
is ready-to-hand become-so much so, indeed, that it seems to lose its
character of readiness-to-hand. It reveals itself as something just presentat-hand and no more, which cannot be budged without the thing that is
missing. The helpless way in which we stand before it is a deficient mode
of concern, and as such it uncovers the Being-just-present-at-hand-andno-more of something ready-to-hand.
In our dealings with the world 1 of our concern, the un-ready-to-hand
can be encountered not only in the sense of that which is unusable or
simply missing, but as something un-ready-to-hand which is not missing
at aIl and not unusable, but which 'stands in the way' of our concern.
That to which our concern refuses to turn, that for which it has 'no time',
is something un-ready-to-hand in the manner of what does not belong
here, of what has not as yet been attended to. Anything which is unready-to-hand inthis way is disturbing to us, and enables us to see
the obstinacy of that with which we must concern ourselves in the
first instance before we do anything else. With this obstinacy, the
presence-at-hand of the ready-to-hand makes itself known in a new
1 In the earlier editions 'WeIt' appears with quotation marks. These are omitted in the
later editions.

74

Being and Time
I. 3
way as the Being of that which still lies before us and caUs for our
attending to it. 1
The modes of conspicuousness, obtrusiveness, and obstinacy aU have
the function of bringing to the fore the characteristic of presence-at-hand
in what is ready-to-hand. But the ready-to-hand is not thereby just
observed and stared at as something present-at-hand; the presence-at-hand
which makes itself known is still bound up in the readiness-to-hand of
equipment. Such equipment still does not veil itself in the guise of mere
Things. It becomes 'equipment' in the sense of something which one
would like to shove out of the way. 2 But in such a Tendency to shove
things aside, the ready-to-hand shows itself as still ready-to-hand in its
unswerving presence-at-hand.
Now that we have suggested, however, that the ready-to-hand is thus
encountered under modifications in which its presence-at-hand is revealed,
how far does this clarify the phenomenon of the world? Even in analysing
these modifications we have not gone beyond the Being of what is withinthe-world, and we have come no closer to the world-phenomenon than
before. But though we have not as yet grasped it, we have brought ourselves to a point where we can bring it into view.
ln conspicuousness, obtrusiveness, and obstinacy, that which is readyto-hand loses its readiness-to-hand in a certain way. But in our dealings
with what is ready-to-hand, this readiness-to-hand is itself understood,
though not thematicaUy. It does not vanish simply, but takes its fareweU,
as it were, in the conspicuousness of the unusable. Readiness-to-hand
still shows itself, and it is precisely here that the worldly character of the
ready-to-hand shows itself too.
104

1 Heidegger's

distinction between 'conspicuousness' (Auffalligkeit') 'obtrusiveness'

('Aufdr~nglichkeit'), and 'obst~nacy' ('Aufsiissigkeit') is hard to present unambiguously in

translatIOn. He seems to have m mind three rather similar situations. In eacb of these we
ar,e confronted by a numbe~ of articles which are ready-to-hand. In the fust situation we
WlSh to use one of these articles for sorne purpose, but we find that it cannot be used for
th~t purpose. It then becomes '~onspicuous' or 'striking', and in a way 'un-ready-to-hand'
-1!1 that we are not able to use 1t. In the second situation we may have precisely the same
articles before us, but we want one which is not there. In this case the missing article too
is 'un-ready-to-hand', but in another way-in that it is not there ta be used. This is
an1,1oying, and the articles which are still ready-to-hand before us, thrust themselves upon
us m sucb a way that they become 'obtrusive' or even 'obnoxious'. In the third situation
so~e of the articles which are ready-to-hand before us are experienced as obstacles to th;
acb1evement of sorne purpose; as obstacles theyare 'obstinate' 'recalcitrant' 'refractory'
and we have to attend to them or dispose of them in sorne way before we ~ finish what
we want t~ do. H~re again the obstinate objects are un-ready-to-hand, but simply in the
way of bemg obstinate.
In. aIl three sit~ations the articles which are ready-to-hand for us tend to lose their
readm~-to-~and m one way or another and reveal their presence-at-hand; only in the
second sltuatlOn, however, do we encounter them as 'just present-at-hand and no more'
('nur nocb Vorhandenes').
Il Here 'Zeug' is med in the pejorative sense of'stuff'. See our note l, p. 97 on H. 68.

1.3
Being and Time
105
The structure of the Being of what is ready-to-hand as equipment is
determined by references or assignments. In a peculiar and obvious
manner, the 'Things' which are closest to us are 'in themselves' ["Ansich"] ; and they are encountereù as 'in themselves' in the concern which
makes use of them without noticing them explicitly-the concern which
can come up against something upusable. When equipment cannot be
used, this implies that the constitutive assignment of the "in-order-to"
to a "towards-this" has been disturbed. The assignments themselves are
not observed; they are rather 'there'when we concernfuUy submit ourselves to them [Sichstellen unter sie]. But when an assignment kas been
disturbed-when something is unusable for some purpose-then the
assignment becomes explicit. Even now, of course, it has not become
explicit as an ontological structure; but it has become explicit
ontically for the circumspection which comes up against the damaging of
the tool. When an assignment to some particular "towards-this" has been
thus circumspectively aroused, we catch sight of the "towards-this" itself,
and along with it everything connected with the work-the whole 'workshop'-as that wherein concern always dwells. The context of equipment
is lit up, not as something never seen before, but as a totality constantly
sighted beforehand in circumspection. With this totality, however, the
world announces itself.
Similarly, when something ready-to-hand is found missing, though its
everyday presence [Zugegensein] has been so obvious that we have never
taken any notice of it, this makes a break in those referential contexts
which circumspection discovers. Our circumspection comes up against
emptiness, and now sees for the first time what the missing article was
ready-to-hand with, and what it was ready-to-handfor. The environment
announces itselfafresh. What is thus lit up is not itselfjust one thing readyto-hand among others; still less is it something present-at-hand upon
which equipment ready-to-hand is somehow founded: it is in the
'there' before anyone has observed or ascertained it. It is itself
inaccessible to circumspection, so far as circumspection is always directed
towards entities; but in each case it has aIready been disclosed for circumspection. 'Disclose' and 'disclosedness' will be used as technical terms
in the passages that follow, and shall signify 'to lay open' and 'the character of having been laid open.' Thus 'to disclose' never means anything
like 'to obtain indirectly by inference'.1
1 In ordinary German usage, the verb 'erschliessen' may mean not only to 'disclose'
but also-in certain constructions--to 'infer' or 'conclude' in the sense in whicb one 'infen'
a conclusion from premisses. Heidegger is deliberately ~ing. out this latter int~rpre~tion,
thoug.h on a very few occasions he may use the word m th,lS sense. He explams ~ own
meamng by the cognate verb 'aufschliessen', to Clay open. To say that something has
been 'disclosed' or 'laid open' in Heidegger's sense, does not mean that one hu any

75

Being and Time
I. 3
That the world does not 'consist' of the ready-to-hand shows itself in
the fact (among others) that whenever the world is lit up in the modes of
concern which we have been Interpreting, the ready-to-hand becomes
deprived of its worldhood so that Being-just-present-at-hand cornes to the
fore. If, in our everyday concern with the 'environment', it is to be possible
for equipment ready-to-hand to be encountered in its 'Being-in-itself'
[in seinem "An-sich-sein"], then those assignments and referential
totalities in which our circumspection 'is absorbed' cannot become a
theme for that circumspection any more than they can for grasping
things 'thematicalIy' but non-circumspectively. If it is to be possible for
the ready-to-hand not to emerge from its inconspicuousness, the world
must net announce itselj. And it is in this that the Being-in-itself of entities
which are ready-to-hand has its phenomenal structure constituted.
In such privative expressions as "inconspicuousness", "unobtrusiveness", and "non-obstinacy", what we have in view is a positive phenomenal character of the Being of that which is proximally ready-to-hand.
With these negative prefixes we have in view the character '(Jf the readyto-hand as "holding itself in"; this is what we have our eye upon in the
"Being-in-itself" of something, l though 'proximalIy' we ascribe it to the
present-at-hand-to the present-at-hand as that which can be thematically ascertained. As long as we take out orientation primarily and exclusively from the present-at-hand, the 'in-itself' can by no means be
ontologically clarified. If, however, this talk about the 'in-itself' has any
ontological importance, sorne interpretation must be called for. This
"in-itself" of Being is something which gets invoked with considerable
emphasis, mostly in an ontical way, and rightly so from a phenomenal
standpoint. But if sorne ontological assertion is supposed to be given when
this is ontically invoked, its claims are not fulfilled by such a procedure. As
the foregoing analysis has already made clear, only on the basis of the
phenomenon of the world can the Being-in-itself of entities within-theworld be grasped ontologicalIy.
But if the world can, in a way, he lit up, it must assuredly be disclosed.
And it has already been disclosed beforehand whenever what is ready-tohand within-the-world is accessible for circumspective concern. The world
is therefore something 'wherein' Dasein as an entity already was, and ifin
106

76

detailed awareness of the contents which are thus 'disclosed' but rather that they have
been 'laid open' to us as implicit in what is given, so that th~ may he made explicit to
?ur awareness ,by further analysis or discrimination of the given, rather than by any
inference from !t•
.1 'Diese "U~" m<;in~ den Charakter des Ansichhaltens des Zuhandenen, das, was wir
Inlt dem An-Slch-sem lm Auge haben .. .' The point seems to be that when we'speak of
something 'as it is "in itself" or "in its own right'" we think of it as 'holding itself in' or
'holding itselfback'-not 'stepping forth' or doing s:,mething 'out of character'.

J. 3

Being and Time
107
any manner it explicitly cornes away from anything, it can never do more
than come back to the world.
Being-in-the-world, according to our Interpretation hitherto, amounts
to a non-thematic circumspective absorption in references or assignments
constitutive for the readiness-to-hand of a totality of equipment. Any
concern is already as it is, because of sorne familiarity with the world.
In this familiarity Dasein can lose itselfin what it encounters within-theworld and be fascinated with it. What is it that Dasein is familiar with?
Why can the worldly character of what is within-the-world be lit up?
The presence-at-hand 1 of entities is thrust to the fore by the possible
breaks in that referential totality in which circumspection 'operates';
how are we to get a closer understanding of this totality?
These questions are aimed at working out both the phenomenon and
the problems of worldhood, and they calI for an inquiry into the interconnections with which certain structures are built up. To answer them
we must analyse these structures more concretely.
~ 17. Reference and Signs

In our provisional Interpretation of that structure of Being which
belongs to the ready-to-hand (to 'equipment'), the phenomenon ofreference or assignment became visible; but we merely gave an indication of
it, and in so sketchy a form that we at once stressed the necessity of
uncovering it with regard to its ontological origin. 2 It became plain,
moreover, that assignments and referential totalities could in sorne sense
become constitutive for worldhood itself. Hitherto we have seen the world
lit up only in and for certain definite ways in which we concern ourselves
environmentally with the ready-to-hand, and indeed it has been lit up
only with the readiness-to-hand ofthat concern. So the further we proceed
in understanding the Being of entities within-the-world, the broader and
fumer becomes the phenomenal basis on which the world-phenomenon
may be laid bare.
We shall again take as our point of departure the Being of the readyto-hand, but this time with the purpose of grasping the phenomenon of
reference or assignment itselfmore precisely. We shaH accordingly attempt an
ontological analysis of a kind of equipment in which one may come across
such 'references' in more senses than one. We come across 'equipment'
in signs. The word "sign" designates many kinds of things: not only may it
stand for different kinds of signs, but Being-a-sign-for can itself be
1 Here the older editions have 'Zuhandenheit' where the newer ones have 'Vorhandenheit',
Il Cf. H. 68 above.

77

Being and Time
I. 3
formalized as a universal kind of relation, so that the sign-structure itself
provides an ontological clue for 'characterizing' any entity whatsoever.
But signs, in the first instance, are themselves items ofequipment whose
specific character as equipment consists in showing or indicating. 1 We find
such signs in signposts, boundary-stones, the baIl for the mariner's stormwarning, signaIs, banners, signs of mourning, and the like. Indicating can
be defined as a 'kind' of referring. Referring is, if we take it as formally
as possible, a relating. But relation does not function as a genus for 'kinds'
or 'species' of references which may somehow become differentiated as
sign, symbol, expression, or signification. A relation is something quite
formaI which may be read off directIy by way of 'formalization' from any
kind ofcontext, whatever its subject-matter or its way ofBeing. u
Every reference is a relation, but not every relation is a reference.
Every 'indication' is a reference, but not every referring is an indicating.
This implies at the same time that every 'indication' is a relation, but not
every relation is an indicating. The formally general character of relation
is thus brought to light. If we are to investigate such phenomena as references, signs, or even significations, nothing is to be gained by characterizing them as relations. Indeed we shall eventually have to show that
'relations' themselves, because of their formally general character, have
their ontological source in a reference.
If the present analysis is to be confined to the Interpretation of the sign
as distinct from the phenomenon of reference, then even within this
limitation we cannot properly investigate the full multiplicity of possible
signs. Among signs there are symptoms [Anzeichen], warning signaIs,
signs of things that have happened already [Rückzeichen], signs to mark
something, signs by which things are recognized; these have different
ways of indicating, regardless of what may be serving as such a sign.
From such 'signs' we must distinguish traces, residues, commemorative
monuments, documents, testimony, symbols, expressions, appearances,
significations. These phenomena can easily be formalized because of their
formaI relational character; we find it especially tempting nowadays to
take such a 'relation' as a clue for subjecting every entity to a kind of
'Interpretation' which always 'fits' because at bottom it says nothing, no
more than the facile schema of content and form.
As an example of a sign we have chosen one which we shall use again
in a later analysis, though in another regard. Motor cars are sometimes fitted up with an adjustable red arrow, whose position indicates
108

78

l ' ••• deren spezifischer Zeugcharakter im Zeigen besteht.' While we have often used

's~ow' ~d '~dicate' to translate 'z~igen' and 'anzeigen' respective1y, in the remainder of

thlS s.ectlon It. seems more appropnate to translate 'zeigen' by 'indicate', or to resort to
hendiadys as ID the present passage.

J.3
Being and Time
log
the direction the vehicle will take-at an intersection, for instance. The
position of the arrow is controlled by the driver. This sign is an item of
equipment which is ready-to-hand for the driver in his concern with
driving, and not for him alone: those who are not travelling with himand they in particular-also make use of it, either by giving way on the
proper side or by stopping. This sign is ready-to-hand within-the-world
in the whole equipment-context of vehicles and traffic regulations. It is
equipment for indicating, and as equipment, it is constituted by reference
or assignment. It has the character of the "in-order-to", its own definite
serviceability; it is for indicating. 1 This indicating which the sign perforrns
can be taken as a kind of 'referring'. But here we must notice that this
'referring' as indicating is not the ontological structure of the sign as
equipment.
Instead, 'referring' as indicating is grounded in the Being-structure of
equipment, in serviceability for.... But an entity may have serviceability
without thereby becoming a sign. As equipment, a 'hammer' too is
constituted by a serviceability, but this does not make it a sign. Indicating,
as a 'reference', is a way in which the "towards-which" of a serviceability becomes ontically concrete; it determines an item of equipment
as for this "towards-which" [und bestimmt ein Zeug zu diesem]. On the
other hand, the kind of reference we get in 'serviceability-for', is an
ontologico-categorial attribute of equipment as equipment. That the
"towards-which" of serviceability should acquire its concreteness in
indicating, is an accident of its equipment-constitution as such. In this
example of a sign, the difference between the reference of serviceability
and the reference of indicating becomes vi~ble in a rough and ready
fashion. These are so far from coinciding that only when they are united
does the concreteness of a definite kind of equipment become possible.
Now it is certain that indicating differs in principle from reference as a
constitutive state of equipment; it is just as incontestable that the sign in
its turn is related in a peculiar and even distinctive way to the kind of
Being which belongs to whatever equipmental totality may be ready-tohand in the environment, and to its worldly character. In our concernful
l'Es hat den Charakter des Um-zu, seine bestimmte Dienlichkeit es ist zum Zeigen •
The v~b '~e~en'! ~ often followe? by an infinitive construction' introduced by the
prepOSItion zu. Simllarly the EngllSh serve' can be followed by an infinitive in such
expressions as 'it serves to indicate .. .' In Heidegger's German the 'zu' construction is
~ried over to the noun 'Dienli~k~t:; the corresponding noun 'sc::rviceability', however,
IS n~t no;mal~y. follow:ed ~y ~ IDfi~ltlye, but rather ~>: an,expressIOn in.troduced by 'for'
e.c" seI'\?'ceablhty for mdI~atmg . .. Sm~e the prepOSitIOn zu plays an Important role in
this sectlon and the next, It would be destrable to provide a uniform translation for it. We
~hall. however, ~anslat~ it as 'for' in such expressions as 'Dienlichkeit zu', but as 'towards'
In such expressIOns as Wozu' ('towards-which') and 'Dazu' ('towards-this') retaining
'in-order-to' for 'Um-zu'.
'

79

Being and Time
I. 3
dealings, equipment for indicating [Zeig-zeug] gets used in a very special
way. But simply to establish this Fact is ontologicaIly insufficient. The
basis and the meaning of this special status must be clarified.
What do we mean when we say that a sign "indicates"? We can answer
this only by determining what kind of dealing is appropriate with equipment for indicating. And we must do this in such a way that the readinessto-hand ofthat equipment can be genuinely grasped. What is the appropriate way of having-to-do with signs? Going back to our example of the
arrow, we must say that the kind of behaving (Being) which corresponds
to the sign we encounter, is either to 'give way' or to 'stand still' vis-à-vis
the car with the arrow. Giving way, as taking a direction, belongs essentiaIly to Dasein's Being-in-the-world. Dasein is always somehow directed
[ausgerichtet] and on its way; standing and waiting are only limiting cases
of this directional 'on-its-way'. The sign addresses itself to a Being-in-theworld which is specificaIly 'spatial'. The sign is not authenticaIly 'grasped'
["erfasst"] ifwejust stare at it and identify it as an indicator-Thing which
occurs. Even if we tum our glance in the direction which the arrow indicates, and look at something present-at-hand in the region indicated, even
then the sign is not authenticaIly encountered. Such a sign addresses
itself tQ the circumspection of our concernful dealings, and it does so in
such a way that the circumspection which goes along with it, foIlowing
where it points, brings into an explicit 'survey' whatever aroundness the
environment may have at the time. This circumspective survey does not
grasp the ready-to-hand; what it achieves is rather an orientation within
our environment. There is also another way in which we can experience
equipment: we may encounter the arrow simply as equipment which
belongs to the car. We can do this without discovering what character it
specificaIly has as equipment: what the arrow is to indicate and how it is
to do so, may remain completely undetermined; yet what we are encountering is not a mere Thing. The experiencing ofa Thing requires a definiteness of its own [ihre eigene Bestimmtheit], and must be contrasted with
coming across a manifold of equipment, which may often be quite
indefinite, even when one cornes across it as especiaIly close.
Signs of the kind we have described let what is ready-to-hand be
encountered; more precisely, they let sorne context ofit become accessible
in such a way that our concernful dealings take on an orientation and hold
it secure. A sign is not a Thing which stands to another Thing in the
relationship of indicating; it is rather an item of equipment which explicitly
raises a totality of equipment into our circumspection so that together with it the
worldly character ofthe ready-to-hand announces itself. In a symptom or a warningsignal, 'what is coming' 'indicates itself', but not in the sense of something
II 0

80

J. 3

Being and Tîme
111
merely occurring, which cornes as an addition to what is already presentat-hand; 'what is coming' is the sort of thing which we are ready for, or
which we 'weren't ready for' if we have been attending to something else. 1
In signs of something that has happened already, what has come to pass
and run its course becomes circumspectively accessible. A sign to mark
something indicates what one is 'at' at any time. Signs always indicate
primarily 'wherein' one lives, where one's concern dweIls, what sort of
involvement there is with something. 2
The peculiar character of signs as equipment becomes especiaIly clear
in 'establishing a sign' ["Zeichenstiftung"]. This activity is performed in
a circumspective fore-sight [Vorsicht] out of which it arises, and which
requires that it be possible for one's particular environment to announce
itself for circumspection at any time by means of something ready-toband, and that this possibility should itself be ready-to-hand. But the
Being of what is most closely ready-to-hand within-the-world possesses
the character of holding-itself-in and not emerging, which we have
described above. 3 Accordingly our circumspective dealings in the environment require sorne equipment ready-to-hand which in its character as
equipment takes over the 'work' of Letting something ready-to-hand become
conspicuous. So when such equipment (signs) gets produced, itsconspicuousness must be kept in mind. But even when signs are thus conspicuous, one
does not let them be present-at-hand at random; they get 'set up'
["angebracht"] in a definite way with a view towards easy accessibility.
In establishing a sign, however, one does not necessarily have to produce equipment which is not yet readY-fo-hand at aIl. Signs also arise
when one takes as a sign [Zum-Zeichen-nehmen] something that is ready-tohand already. In this mode, signs "get established" in a sense which is
even more primordial. In indicating, a ready-to-hand equipment totality,
and even the environment in general, can be provided with an availability
which is circumspectively oriented; and not only this: establishing a sign
can, above all, reveaI. What gets taken as a sign becomes accessible only
through its readiness-to-hand. If, for instance, the south wind 'is accepted'
["gilt"] by the farmer as a sign ofrain, then this 'acceptance' ["Geltung"]
-or the 'value' with which the entity is 'invested'-is not a sort of bonus
over and above what is already present-at-hand in itself-viz, the flow of
air in a definite geographical direction. The south wind may be meteorologically accessible as something which just occurs; but it is never present1'. . . das "was kommt" ist soIches, daraufwir uns gefasst maehen, bzw. "nieht gefasst
waren", sofem wir uns mit anderem befassten.'
li 'Das Merkzeiehen zeigt, "woran" man jeweiis ist. Die Zeiehen zeigen primJir immer
das, "worin" man lebt, wobei das Besorgen sieh aufhaIt, welche Bewandtnis es damit
bat.' On 'Bewandtnis', see note 2, p. 115 H. 84 below.
a See H. 75-76 above.

Being and Time
I. 3
at-hand proximally in such a way as this, only occasionally taking over the
function ofa warning signal. On the contrary, only by the circumspection
with which one takes account of things in farming, is the south wind
discovered in its Being.
But, one will protest, that which gets taken as a sign must first have
become accessible in itself and been apprehended before the sign gets
established. Certainly it must in any case be such that in some way we
can come across it. The question simply remains as to how entities are discovered in this previous encountering, whether as mere Things which
occur, or rather as equipment which has not been understood-as something ready-to-hand with which we have hitherto not known 'how to
begin', and which has accordingly kept itself veiled from the purview of
circumspection. And here again, when the equipmental characters of the ready-tohand are still circumspectively undiscovered, they are not to be Interpreted as bare
Thinghood presented for an apprehension of what is just present-at-hand and no
more.
The Being-ready-to-hand of signs in our everyday dealings, and the
conspicuousness which belongs to signs and which may be produced for
various purposes and in various ways, do not merely serve to document
the inconspicuousness constitutive for what is most closely ready-to-hand;
the sign itself gets its conspicuousness from the inconspicuousness of the
equipmental totality, which is ready-to-hand and 'obvious' in its everydayness. The knot which one ties in a handkerchief [der bekannte "Knopf im
Taschentuch"] as a sign to mark something is an example of this. What
such a sign is to indicate is always something with which one has to
concern oneself in one's everyday circumspection. Such a sign can
indicate many things, and things of the most various kinds. The wider
the extent to which it can indicate, the narrower its intelligibility and its
usefulness. Not only is it, for the most part, ready-to-hand as a sign only
for the person who 'establishes' it, but it can even become inaccessible to
him, so that another sign is needed if the first is to be used circumspectively at all. So when the knot cannot be used as a sign, it does not lose
its sign-character, but it acquires the disturbing obtrusiveness ofsomething
most dosely ready-to-hand.
One might be tempted to cite the abundant use of 'signs' in primitive
Dasein, as in fetishism and magic, to illustrate the remarkable role
which they play in everyday concern when it comes to our understanding
of the world. Certainly the establishment of signs which underlies this
way of using them is not performed with any theoretical aim or in the
course of theoretical speculation. This way of using them always remai.ns
completely within a Being-in-the-world which is 'immediate'. But on
Il 2

81

J. 3

Being and Time
Il3
closer inspection it becomes plain that to interpret fetishism and
magic by taking our clue from the idea of signs in general, is not enough
to enable us to grasp the kind of 'Being-ready-to-hand' which belongs to
entities encountered in the primitive world. With regard to the signphenomenon, the following Interpretation may be given: for primitive
man, the sign coincides with that which is indicated. Not only can the
sign represent this in the sense of serving as a substitute for what it indicates, but it can do so in such a way that the sign itself always is what it
indicates. This remarkable coinciding does not mean, however, that the
sign-Thing has already undergone a certain 'Objectification'-that it has
been experienced as a mere Thing and misplaced into the same realm of
Being of the present-at-hand as what it indicates. This 'coinciding' is not
an identification of things which have hitherto been isolated from each
other: it consists rather in the fact that the sign has not as yet become free
from that of which it is a sign. Such a use of signs is still absorbed completely in Being-towards what is indicated, so that a sign as such cannot
detach itself at aU. This coinciding is based not on a prior Objectification
but on the fact that such Objectification is completely lacking. This means,
however, that signs are not discovered as equipment at all-that ultimately
what is 'ready-to-hand' within-the-world just does not have the kind of
Being that belongs to equipment. Perhaps· even readiness-to-hand and
equipment have nothing to contribute [nichts auszurichten] as ontological
clues in Interpreting the primitive world; and certainly the ontology of
Thinghood does even less. But if an understanding of Being is constitutive
for primitive Dasein and for the primitive world in general, then it is all
the more urgent to work out the 'formaI' idea of worldhood--or at least
the idea of a phenomenon modifiable in such a way that all ontological
assertions to the effect that in a given phenomenal context something is
not yet such-and-such or no longer such-and-such, may acquire a positive
phenomenal meaning in terms of what it is not. l
The foregoing Interpretation of the sign should merely provide phenomenal support for our characterization of references or assignments.
The relation between sign and reference is threefold. 1. Indicating, as a
way whereby the "towards-which" of a serviceability can become concrete, is founded upon the equipment-structure as 'such, upon the "inorder-to" (assignment). 2. The indicating which the sign does is an
equipmental character ofsomething ready-to-hand, and as such it belongs
to a totality of equipment, to a context of assignments or references.
3. The sign is not only ready-to-hand with other equipment, but in its
readiness-to-hand the environment becomes in each case explicitly
1'. . . aus dem, was es nicht ist.' The aIder editions write 'was' for 'was'.

82

Being and Time
1. 3
accessible for circumspection. A sign is sornetking ontically ready-to-hand,
which funetions both as this definite equiprnent and as sornetking indicative of
[was . . . anzeigt] the ontological ltructure of readiness-to-hand, of referential
totalities, and of worldhood. Here is rooted the special status of the sign as
something ready-to-hand in that environment with which we concem
ourselves circumspectively. Thus the reference or the assignment itself
cannot be conceived as a sign of it is to serve ontologically as the foundation upon which signs are based. Reference is not an ontical characteristic
of something ready-to-hand, when it is rather that by which readinessto-hand itself is constituted.
ln what sense, then, is reference 'presupposed' ontologically in the
ready-to-hand, and to what extent is it, as such an ontological foundation,
at the same time constitutive for worldhood in general?
114-

83

~ lB. Involvernent and Significanee;

the Worldkood of the World
The ready-to-hand is encountered within-the-world. The Being of this
entity, readiness-to-hand, thus stands in some ontological relationship
towards the world and towards worldhood. In anything ready-to-hand
the world is always 'there'. Whenever we encounter anything, the world
has already been previously discovered, though not thematically. But it
can also be lit up in certain ways of dealing with our environment. The
world is that in terms of which the ready-to-hand is ready-to-hand. How
can the world let the ready-to-hand be encountered? Our analysis
hitherto has shown that what we encounter within-the-world has, in its
very Being, been freed i for our concernful circumspection, for taking
account. What does this previous freeing amount to, and how is this to
be understood as an ontologically distinctive feature of the world? What
problems does the question of the worldhood of the world lay before us?
We have indicated that the state which is constitutive for the ready-tohand as equipment is one of reference or assignment. How can entities
with this kind ofBeing be freed by the world with regard to their Being?
Why are these the first entities to be encountered? As definite kinds of
references we have mentioned serviceability-for-, detrimentality [Abtraglichkeit], usability, and the like. The "towards-which" [das Wozu] of a
serviceability and the "for-which" [das Wofür] of a usability prescribed
the ways in which such a reference or assignment can become concrete.
But the 'indicating' of the sign and the 'hammering' of the hammer are
not properties of entities. Indeed, they are not properties at all, if the
ontological structure designated by the term 'property' is that of some
I 'freigegeben'. The idea seems to be that what we encounter has, as it were, been
re1eased, set free, given its freedom, or given free rein, so that our circumspection can take
account of it.

1. 3

Being and Time
115
definite character which it is possible for Things to possess [einer môglichen Bestimmtheit von Dingen]. Anything ready-to-hand is, at the worst,
appropriate for some purposes and inappropriate for others; and its
'properties' are, as it were, still bound up in these ways in which it is
appropriate or inappropriate, I just as presence-at-hand, as a possible
kind of Being for something ready-to-hand, is bound up in readiness-toband. Serviceability too, however, as a constitutive state of equipment
(and serviceability is a reference), is not an appropriateness of some
entity; it is rather the condition (so far as Being is in question) which
rnakes it possible for the character of such an entity to be defined by its
appropriatenesses. But what, then, is "reference" or "assignment" to
mean? To say that the Being of the ready-to-hand has the structure of
assignment or reference means that it has in itself the character of having
been assigned or referred [Verwiesenkeit]. An entity is discovered when it has
been assigned or referred to something, and,referred as that entity which
it is. With any such entity there is an involvement which it has in some:hing. 2 The character of Being which belongs to the ready-to-hand is
ust such an involvement. If something has an involvement, this implies
etting it be involved in something. The relationship of the "with '" in ..."
hall be indicated by the term "assignment" or "reference". 3
I The words 'property' and 'appropriateness' reflect the etymological connection of
[eidegger's 'Eigenschaft' and "Geeignetheit'.
la 'Es hat mit ihm hei etwas sein Bewenden.' The terms 'Bewenden' and 'Bewandtnis' are
mong the most difficult for the translator. Their root meaning has to do with the way
>mething is already 'tuming' when one lets it 'go its own way', 'ron its course', follow
s 'bent' or 'tendency', or finish 'what it is about', 'what it is up to' or 'what it is
lvolved in'. The German expressions, however, have no simple English equivalents,
ut are restricted to a rather special group of idioms such as the following, which we
ave taken from Wildhagen and Héraucourt's admirable English-Gmnan, Gmnan-English
lictionary (Volume II, Wiesbaden 1953): 'es dabei bewenden lassen'-'to leave it at
'lat, to let it go at that, to let it rest there'; 'und dabei hatte es sein Bewenden'-'and
Ilere the matter ended'; 'dabei muss es sein Bewenden haben'-'there the matter must
est'-'that must suffice'; 'die Sache hat eine ganz andere Bewandtnis'-'the case is
luite different'; 'damit hat es seine besondere BeWllndtnis'-'there is something peculiar
.bout it; thereby hangs a tale'; 'damit hat est folgende Bewandtnis'-'the matter
s as follows'.
We have tried to render both 'Bewenden' and 'Bewandtnis' by expressions including
~ther 'involve' or 'involvement'. But the contexts into which these words can easily be
fitted in ordinary English do not correspond very well to those which are possible for
'Bewenden' and 'Bewandtnis'. Our task is further complicated by the emphasis which
Heidegger gives to the prepositions 'mit' and obei' .in connection wit~ :Bewe~den' and
'Bewandtnis'. In passages such as the present one, lt would be more IdlOmatlc to leave
these prepositions untranslated and simply write: 'Any such entity is involved in doing
something', or 'Any such entity is involved in sorne activity'. But 'mit' and '~ei' receive so
much attention in this connection that in contexts such as this we shall sometlmes translate
them as 'with' and 'in', though e1sewhere we shall handle 'b~i' very differently. (The
reader must bear in mind that the kind of 'involvement' with WhlCh we are here concerned
is always an involvement in sorne activiry, which one is performing, not an involvement
in circumstances in which one is 'caught' or 'entangled'.)
3 'In Bewandtnis liegt: bewenden lassen mit etwas bei etwas. Der Bezug des "mit

84

Being and Time
I. 3
When an entity within-the-world has already been proximaIly freed
for its Being, that Being is its "involvement". W i t h any such entity as
entity, there is some involvement. The fact that it has such an involvement
is ontologically definitive for the Being of such an entity, and is not an
ontical assertion about it. That in which it is involved is the "towardswhich" of serviceability, and the "for-which" of usability.l With the
"towards-which" of serviceability there can again be an involvement:
with this thing, for instance, which is ready-to-hand, and which we
accordingly call a "hammer", there is an involvement in hammering;
with hammering, there is an involvement in making something fast;
with making something fast, there is an involvement in protection against
bad weather; and this protection 'is' for the sake of [um-willen] providing
shelter for Dasein-that is to say, for the sake of a possibility of Dasein's
Being. Whenever something ready-to-hand has an involvement with it,
what involvement this is, has in each case been outlined in advance in
terms of the totality ofsuch involvements. In a workshop, for example, the
totality of involvements which is constitutive for the ready-to-hand in its
readiness-to-hand, is 'earlier' than any single item of equipment; so 000
for the farmstead with aIl its utensils and outlying lands. But the totality
of involvements itself goes back ultimately to a "towards-which" in
which there is no further involvement: this "towards-which" is not an
entity with the kind ofBeing that belongs to what is ready-to-hand within
a world; it is rather an entity whose Being is defined as Being-in-theworld, and to whose state ofBeing, worldhood itselfbelongs. This primary
"towards-which" is not just another "towards-this" as something in which
an involvement is possible. The primary 'towards-which' is a "for-thesake-of-which".2 But the 'for-the-sake-of' always pertains 00 the Being of

1 16

. . . bei ..." soli durch den Terminus Verweisung angezeigt werden.' Here the point seems
to be ~hat if som~thing has an 'involvement' in the sense of 'Bewandtnis' (or rather, if
there IS such an mvolvement 'with' it), the thing which has this involvement has been
:assigned' or 'referred' for a certain activity or purpose 'in' which it may he said to he
lllvoived.
~ 'Bewand~nis is~ d.as Sein de~ innerweltlichen Seienden, darauf es je schon zuniichst
frelgegeben ISt. Mit Ihm ais Selendem hat es je eine Bewandtnis. Dieses dass es eine
Be~andtnis hat, ist die ontologische Bestimmung des Seins dieses Seiend~n, nicht eine
ontIsche Aussage über das Seiende. Das Wohei es die Bewandtnis hat ist das Wozu der
Dienlichkeit, das Wofür der ':erwend~arkeit.' This passage and thos~ which follow are
hard to translate because Heidegger 15 using three carefully differentiated prepositions
('zu:, 'ftir', and 'auf') wher<: Eoglish idiom needs only 'for'. We can say that something is
se~lceable, usa~le, or aPI?I~cable 'for' a purpose. and that it may be freed or given free
rem 'for' sorne kmd of actlvlty. In German, however it will he said to have 'Dienlichkeit
ZU. ' • .', .'Verwendbarkeitfür .. .'; and it will he 'freigegeben auf. , .'. In the remainder of
thls sectIon we shall use .'for' bath for 'für' and for 'auf' as they occur in these expressions;
we shall, however, contInue to use 'towards-which' for the 'Wozu' of 'Dienlichkeit'. See
note l, p. lOg, H. 78 above.
~ '~ies.es primii~e \yozu ist kein Dazu ais miigliches Wohei einer Bewandtnis. Das
pnmare 'Wozu" ISt em Worum-willen.'

1. 3
Being and Time
117
Dasein, for which, in its Being, that very Being is essentiaIlyan issue. We
have thus indicated the interconnection by which the structure of an
involvement leads to Dasein's very Being as the sole authentic "for-thesake-of-which"; for the present, however, we shaIl pursue this no further.
'Letting something be involved' must first be c1arified enough to give the
phenomenon ofworldhood the kind ofdefiniteness which makes it possible
to formulate any problems about it.
OnticaIly, "letting something be involved" signifies that within our
factical concern we let something ready-to-hand he so-and-so as it is
already and in order that it be such. 1 The way we take this ontical sense of
'letting be' is, in principle, ontological. And therewith we Interpret the
meaning of previously freeing what is proximaIly ready-to-hand withinthe-world. Previously letting something 'be' does not mean that we must
first bring it into its Being and produce it; it means rather that something
which is already an 'entity' must be discovered in its readiness-to-hand,
and that we must thus let the entity which has this Being be encountered.
This 'a priori' letting-something-be-involved is the condition for the
possibility of encountering anything ready-to-hand, so that Dasein, in its
ontical dealings with the entity thus encountered, can thereby let it be
involved in the ontical sense. 2 On the other hand, if letting something
be involved is understood ontologicaIly, what is then pertinent is the
freeing of everything ready-to-hand as ready-to-hand, no matter whether,
taken onticaIly, it is involved thereby, or whether it is rather an entity of
precisely such a sort that ontically it is not involved thereby. Such entities
are, proximally and for the most part, those with which we concern
ourselves when we do not let them 'be' as we have discovered that they
are, but work upon them, make improvements in them, or smash them
to pieces.
When we speak of having already let something be involved, so that it
has been freed for that involvement, we are using a perfeet tense a priori
which characterizes the kind of Being belonging to Dasein itself. 3 Letting
an entity be involved, if we understand this ontologically, consists in
previouslyfreeing it for [auf] itsreadiness-to-hand within the environment.
When we let something be involved, it must be involved in something;
and in terms of this "in-which", the "with-which" of this involvement
l 'Bewendenlassen bedeutet ontisch; innerhalb eines faktischen Besorgens ein Zuhandenes so und so sein lassen, wie es nunmehr ist und damit es so ist.'
2 " , , es im ontischen Sinne dabei bewenden lassen kann.' While we have translated
'dabei' simply as 'thereby' in th.is contex~, it.!s ~oss:ble that it shoul~ hav~ b.een cons.tru,ed
rather as an instance of the special use of bel wlth bewenden lassen , A slmllar amblgUIty
occurs in the following sentence,
3 'Das auf Bewandtnis hin freigebende Je-schon-haben-bewenden-Iassen ist ein
apriorisches Perfekt, das die Seinsart des Daseins se1bst charakterisiert.

85

86

Il8
Being and Time
I. 3
1
is freed. Our concern encounters it as this thing that is ready-to-hand.
To the extent that any entiry shows itself to concern 2-that is, to the
extent that it is discovered in its Being-it is already something readyto-hand environmentally; it just is not 'proximally' a 'world-stuff' that
is merely present-at-hand.
As the Being of something ready-to-hand, an involvement is itself
discovered only on the basis of the prior discovery of a totality of involvements. So in any involvement that has been discovered (that is, in anything ready-to-hand which we encounter), what we have called the
"worldly character" of the ready-to-hand has been discovered beforehand. In this totality of involvements which has been discovered beforehand, there lurks an ontological relationship to the world. In letting
entities be involved so that they are freed for a totality of involvements,
one must have disclosed already that for which [woraufhin] they have been
freed. But that for which something environmentally ready-to-hand
has thus been freed (and indeed in such a manner that it becomes
accessible as an entity within-the-world first of all), cannot itselfhe conceived as an entity with this discovered kind of Being. It is essentially not
discoverable, if we henceforth reserve "discoveredness" as a term fora
possibility of Being which every entity without the character of Dasein may
possess.
But what does it mean to say. that that for which 3 entities within-theworld areproximally freed must have been previously disclosed? To
Dasein's Being, an understanding of Being belongs. Any understanding
[Verstândnis] has its Being in an act of understanding [Verstehen].
If Being-in-the-world is a kind of Being which is essentially befitting to
Dasein, then to understand Being-in-the-world belongs to the essential
content of its understanding of Being. The previous disclosure of that for
which what we encounter within-the-world is subsequently freed,"
amounts to nothing else than understanding the world-that world
towards which Dasein as an entity always comports itself.
Whenever we let there be an involvement with something in something
beforehand, our doing so is grounded in our understanding such things as
letting something be involved, and such things as the "with-which" and
the "in-which" of involvements. Anything of this sort, and anything else
l 'Aus dem Wobei des Bewendenlassens her ist das Womit der Bewandtnis freigegeben.'
2 Here we follow the newer editions in reading: 'Sofern sich ihm überhaupt ein Seiendes

zeigt .. .'. The oider editions read 'Sofern sich mit ihm .. .', which is somewhat ambiguous
but suggests that we should write: 'To the extent that with what is ready-to-hand any
entity shows itse1f .. .'.
3 'Worauf'. The older editions have 'woraufhin'.
4 'Das vorgangige Erschliessen dessen, woraufhin die Freigabe des innerwe1ùichen
Begegnenden erfolgt •• .'

J. 3

Being and Time
1 19
that is basic for it, such as the "towards-this" as that in which there is an
involvement, or such as the "for-the-sake-of-which" to which_ every
"towards-which" ultimately goes back1-all these must be disclosed
beforehand with a certain intelligibility [Verstandlichkeit]. And what is
that wherein Dasein as Being-in-the-world understands itself pre-ontologically? In understanding a context of relations such as we have
mentioned, Dasein bas assigned itselfto an "in-order-to" [Um-zu], and it
has done so in terms of a potentiality-for-Being for the sake of which it
itself i s--one which it may have seized upon either explicitly or tacitly,
and which may be either authentic or inauthentic. This "in-order-to"
prescribes a "towards-this" as a possible "in-which" for letting something
be involved; and the structure of letting it be involved implies that this
is an involvement which something has-an involvement which is with
something. Dasein always assigns itself from a "for-the-sake-of-which"
to the "with-which" ofan involvement; that is to say, to the extent that it
is, it always lets entities be encountered as ready-to-hand. 2 That wherein
[Worin] Dasein understands itself beforehand in the mode of assigning
itself is that for which [das Woraufhin] it has let entities be encountered
beforehand. The "wherein" of an act of understanding which assigns or reJers itse1J,
is that for which one lets entities be encountered in the kind of Being that belongs
to involvements,. and this "wherein" is the phenomenon of the world. 3 And the
structlire of that to which [woraufhin] Dasein assigns itself is what makes
up the worldhood of the world.
That wherein Dasein already understands itself in this way is always
something with which it is primordially familiar. This familiarity with
the worlù does not necessarily require that the relations which are constitutive for the world as world should be theoretically transparent.
However, the possibility of giving these relations an explicit ontologicoexistential Interpretation, is grounded in this familiarity with the world;
and this familiarity, in turn, is constitutive for Dasein, and goes to make
up Dasein's understanding of Being. This possibility is one which can be
seized upon explicitly in so far as Dasein has set itself the task of giving
a primordial Interpretation for its own Being and for the possibilities of
that Being, or indeed for the meaning of Being in general.
l ' ••. wie das Dazu, ais wobei es die Bewandtnis hat, das Worum-willen, daraufletztlich
alles Wozu zurückgeht.' The older editions have '. . . ais wobei es je die Bewandtnis
hat .. .' and omit the hyphen in 'Worum-willen'.
2 'Dieses zeichnet ein Dazu vor, ais mogliches Wobei eines Bewendenlassens, das
strukturmiissig mit etwas bewenden Iasst. Dasein verweist sich je schon immer aus einem
Worum-willen her an das Womit einer Bewandtnis, d. h. es Iiisst je immer schon, sofern
es ist, Seiendes ais Zuhandenes begegnen.'
3 'Das Worin des sichverweisenden Verstehens ais Woraujhin des Begegnenlassens von Seietu/em
in der Seinsart der Bewandtnis ist das Phiinornen der Welt.'

Being and Time
I. 3
But as yet our analyses have done no more than lay bare the horizon
within which such things as the world and worldhood are to be sought.
Ifwe are to consider these further, we must, in the first instance, make it
still more clear how the context of Dasein's assigning-itself is to be taken
ontologically.
In the act of understanding [Verstehen], which we shall analyse more
thoroughly later (Compare Section 31), the relations indicated above
must have been previously disclosed; the act of understanding holds them
in this disclosedness. It holds itself in them with familiarity; and in so
doing, it holds them before itself, for it is in these that its assignment
operates. 1 The understanding lets itself make assignments both i n these
relationships themselves and 0 f them. 2 The relational character which
these relationships of assigning possess, we take as one of signifying. 3 In
its familiarity with these relationships, Dasein 'signifies' to itself: in a primordial manner it gives itself both its Being and its potentiality-for-Being
as something which it is to understand with regard to its Being-in-theworld. The "for-the-sake-of-which" signifies an "in-order-to"; this in
turn, a "towards-this"; the latter, an "in-which" of letting something be
involved; and that in turn, the "with-which" of an involvement. These
relationships are bound up with one another as a primordial totality;
they are what they are a s this signifying [Be-deuten] in which Dasein
gives itself beforehand its Being-in-the-world as something to be understood. The relational totality of this signifying we call "signijicance". This
is what makes up the structure of the world-the structure ofthat wherein
Dasein as such already is. Dasein, in its familiarity with signijicance, is the
ontical condition for the possibility of discovering entities which are encountered in a
world with involvement (readiness-to-hand) as their kind of Being, and which can
thus make themselves known as they are in themselves [in seinem An-sich]. Dasein
as such is always something ofthis sort; along with its Being, a context of
the ready-to-hand is already essentially discovered: Dasein, in so far as it
120

87

l 'Das ... Verstehen ... hiilt die angezeigten Bezüge in einer vorgiingigen Erschlossenheit. lm vertrauten Sich-darin-halten hiilt es sich diese VOT ais das, worin sich sein Verweisen bewegt.' The context suggests that Heidegger's 'diese' refers to the relationships
(Bezüge) rather than to the disclosedness (Erschlossenheit), though the latter interpretation seems a bit more plausible grammatically.
2 'Das Verstehen liisst sieh in und von diesen Bezügen selbst verweisen.' It is not
entirely clear whether 'von' should be translated as 'of', 'from', or 'by'.
a 'be-deuten'. While Heidegger ordinarily writes this word without a hyphen (even, for
instance, in the next sentence), he here takes pains to hyphenate it so as to suggest that
etymologically it consists of the intensive prefix 'be-' followed by the verb 'deuten'-to
'interpret', 'explain' or 'point to' something. We shall continue to follow our convention
of usually translating 'bedeuten' and 'Bedeutung' by 'signify' and 'signification' respectively, reserving '~ignificance' for 'Bedeutsamkeit' (or, in a few cases, for 'Bedeutung').
~ut ~hese translatIOns obscure the underlying meanings which Heidegger is emphasizing
ln th,s passage.

J.3
Being and Time
121
is, has always submitted 1 itself already to a 'world' which it encounters,
and this submission 1 belongs essentially to its Being.
But in significance itself, with which Dasein is always familiar, there
lurks the ontological condition which makes it possible for Dasein, as
something which understands and interprets, to disclose such things as
'significations'; upon these, in turn, is founded the Being of words and of
language.
The significance thus disclosed is an existential state of Dasein-of its
Being-in-the-world; and as such it is the ontical condition for the possibility
that a totality of involvements can be discovered.
If we have thus determined that the Being of the ready-to-hand
(involvement) is definable as a context of assignments or references, and
that even worldhood may so be defined, then has not the 'substantial
Being' of entities within-the-world been volatilized into a system of
Relations? And inasmuch as Relations are always 'something thought',
has not the Being of entities within-the-world been dissolved into 'pure
thinking'?
Within our present field of investigation the folIowing structures and
dimensions of ontological problematics, as we have repeatedly emphasized, must be kept in principle distinct: 1. the Being of those entities
within-the-world whieh we proximally encounter-readiness-to-hand;
2. the Being of those entities which we can come across and whose nature
we can determine if we discover them in their own right by going through
the entities proximalIy encountered-presence-at-hand; 3. the Being of
that ontical condition which makes it possible for entities within-the-world
to be discovered at alI-the worldhood of the world. This third kind of
Being gives us an existential way of determining the nature of Being-in-theworld, that is, of Dasein. The other two concepts of Being are categories,
and pertain to entities whose Being is not of the kind which Dasein possesses. The context of assignments or references, which, as significance, 'is
constitutive for worldhood, can be taken formally in the sense of a system
of Relations. But one must note that in such formalizations the phenomena get levelIed off so much that their real phenomenal content may be
lost, especially in the case ofsuch 'simple' relationships as those which lurk
in significance. The phenomenal content ofthese 'Relations' and 'Relata'
l'angewiesen'; 'Angewiesenheit'. The verb 'anweisen', like 'verweisen', can often be
translated as 'assign', particularly in the sense in whic1l one assigns or allots a place to
something, or in the sense in which one gives an 'assignment' to someone by instructing
him how to proceed. The past participle 'angewiesen' can thus mean 'assigned' in either
ofthese senses; but it often takes on the connotation of'being dependent on' something or
even 'at the mercy' of something. In this passage we have tried to compromise by using
the verb 'submit'. Other passages cali for other idioms, and no single standard translation
seems feasible.

88

Being and Time
I. 3
-the "in-order-to", the "for-the-sake-of", and the "with-which" of an
involvement-is such that they resist any sort of mathematical functionalization; nor are they merely something thought, first posited in an 'act
of thinking.' They are rather relationships in which concernful circumspection as such already dwells. This 'system of Relations', as something
constitutive for worldhood, is so far from volatilizing the Being of the
ready-to-hand within-the-world, that the worldhood of the world provides the basis on which such entities can for the first time be discovered
as they are 'substantially' 'in themselves'. And only if entities within-theworld can be encountered at all, is it possible, in the field of such entities,
to make accessible what is just present-at-hand and no more. By reason of
their Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more, these latter entities can
have their 'properties' defined mathematically in 'functional concepts.'
Ontologically, such concepts are possible only in relation to entities whose
Being has the character of pure substantiality. Functional concepts are
never possible except as formalized substantial concepts.
In order to bring out the specifically ontological problematic of worldhood even more sharply, we shall carry our analysis no further until we
have c1arified our Interpretation of worldhood by a case at the opposite
extreme.
122

89

B. A Contrast between our Ana(ysis of Worldhood and Descartes'
Interpretation of the World
Only step by step can the concept of worldhood and the structures
which this phenomenon embraces be firmly secured in the course of our
investigation. The Interpretation of the world begins, in the first instance,
with some entity within-the-world, so that the phenomenon of the world
in general JlO longer comes into view; we shall accordingly try to clarify
this approach ontologically by considering what is perhaps the most
extreme form in which it has been carried out. We not only shall
present briefly the basic features of Descartes' ontology of the 'world', but
shall inquire into its presuppositions and try to characterize these in the
light of what we have hitherto achieved. The account we shall give of
these matters will enable us to know upon what basically undiscussed
ontological 'foundations' those Interpretations of the world which have
come after Descartes-and still more those which preceded him-have
operated.
Descartes sees the extensio as basically definitive ontologically for the
world. In so far as extension is one of the constituents ofspatiality (according to Descartes it is even identical with it), while in some sense spatiality
remains constitutive for the world, a discussion of the Cartesian ontology

1. 3
Being and Time
123
of the 'world' will provide us likewise with a negative support for a
positive explication of the spatiality of the environment and of Dasein
itself. With regard to Descartes' ontology there are three topics which
we shall treat: 1. the definition of the 'world' as res extensa (Section 19);
2. the foundations of this ontological definition (Section 20); 3. a hermeneutical discussion of the Cartesian ontology of the 'world' (Section 21).
The considerations which follow will not have been grounded in full detail
until the 'cogito sum' has been phenomenologically destroyed. (See Part
Two, Division 2.)1
.
, 19. The Definition of the 'World' as res extensa.
Descartes distinguishes the 'ego cogito' from the 'res corporea'. This distinction will thereafter be determinative ontologically for the distinction
between 'Nature' and 'spirit'. No matter with how many variations of
content the opposition between 'Nature' and 'spirit' may get set up ontically, its ontological foundations, and indeed the very poles of this
opposition, remain unc1arified; this unclarity has its proximate [nachste]
roots in Descartes' distinction. What kind of understanding of Being does
he have when he defines the Being of these entities? The term for the
Being of an entity that is in itself, is "substantia". Sometimes this expression means the Being ofan entity as substance, substantiality; at other times
it means the entity itself, a substance. That "substantia" is used in these two
ways is fiot accidentai; this already holds for the ancient conception of

.,

ovuta.

To determine the nature of the res corporea ontologically, we must
explicate the substance of this entity as a substance-that is, its substantiality. What makes up the authentic Being-in-itself [An-ihm-selbstsein] of the res corporea? How is it at aIl possible to grasp a substance as
such, that is, to grasp its substantiality? "Et quidem ex quolibet attnbuto
substantia cognoscitur; sed una tamen est cuiusque substantiae praecipua proprietas,
quae ipsius naturam essentiamque constituit, et ad quam aliae omnes referuntur."111
Substances become accessible in their 'attributes', and every substance has
some distinctive propertyfrom which the essence of the substantiality ofthat
definite substance can be read off. Which property is this in the case of
the res corporea? ".Nempe extensio in longum, latum et profundum, substantiae
corporeae naturam constituit."iv Extension-namely, in length, breadth, and
thickness-makes up the real Being of that corporeal substance which we
calI the 'world'. What gives the extensio this distinctive status? ".Nam
omne aliud quod corpon tribui potest, extensionem praesupponit .. ."v Extension is
a state-of-Being constitutive for the entity we are talking about; it is that
1 This portion of Being and Time has never been published.

90

Being and Time
I. 3
which must already 'be' before any other ways in which Being is determined, so that these can 'be' what they are. Extension must be 'assigned'
["zugewiesen"] primarily to the corporeal Thing. The 'world's' extension
and substantiality (which itselfis characterized byextension) are accord·
ingly demonstrated by showing how aIl the other characteristics which
this substance definitely possesses (especially divisio, figura, motus), can be
conceived only as modi o(extensio, while, on the other hand, extensio sine
figura vel motu remains quite intelligible.
Thus a corporeal Thing that maintains its total extension can still
undergo many changes in the ways in which that extension is distributed
in the various dimensions, and can present itself in manifold shapes as
one and the same Thing. " . . . atque unum et idem corpus, retinerulo suam
eandem quantitatem, pluribus diversis modis potest extendi: nunc scilicet magis
secundum longitudinem, minusque secundum latitudinem vel profunditatem, ac paulo
post e contra magis secundum latitudinem, et minus secundum 10ngitudinem."VI
Shape is a modus of extensio, and so is motion: for motus is grasped only
"si de nullo nisi locali cogitemus, ac de vi a qua excitatur ... non inquiramus."v11
If the motion is a property of the res corporea, and a property which i s,
then in order for it to be experienceable in its Being, it must be conceived
in terms of the Being of this entity itself, in terms of extensio; this means
that it must be conceived as mere change of location. So nothing like
'force' counts for anything in determining what the Being of this entity is.
Matter may have such definite characteristics as hardness, weight, and
colour; (durities, pondus, color); but these can aIl be taken away from it,
and it still remains what it is. These do not go to make up its real Being;
and in so far as they are, they turn out to be modes of extensio. Descartes
tries to show this in detail with regard to 'hardness': "Nam, quantum ad
duritiem, nihil aliua de illa sensus nobis indicat, quam partes aurorum corporum
resistere motui manuum nostrarum, cum in illas incurrant. Si enim, quotiescunque
manus nostrae versus aliquam partern moventur, corpora omnia ibi existentia recederent eadem celeritate qua illae accedunt, nullam unquam duritiem sentiremus. Nec
ullo moao potest intelligi, corpora quae sic recederent, idcirco naturam corporis esse
amissura; nec proinde ipsa in duritie consistit. "vU! Hardness is experienced
when one feels one's way by touch [Tasten]. What does the sense oftouch
'tell' us about it? The parts of the hard Thing 'resist' a movement of the
hand, such as an attempt to push it away. If, however, hard bodies, those
which do not give way, should change their locations with the same
velocity as that of the hand which 'strikes at' them, nothing would ever
get touched [Berühren], and hardness would not be experienced and
would accordingly never be. But it is quite incomprehensible that bodies
which give way with such velocity should thus forfeit any of their
124

91

I. 3
Being and Time
125
corporeal Being. If they retain this even under a change in velocity which
makes it impossible for anything like 'hardness' to be, then hardness does
not belong to the Being of entities of this sort. "Eademque ratione ostendi
potest, et pondus, et colorem, et alias omnes eiusmodi qualitates, quae in materia
corporea sentiuntur, ex ea tolli posse, ipsa integra remanente: unde sequitur, a nulla
ex illis eius <sc. extensionis) naturam aependere."ix Thus what makes up the
Being of the res corporea is the extensio: that which is omnimodo divisibile,
figurabile et mobile (that which can change itselfby being divided, shaped,
or moved in any way), that which is capax mutationum-that which maintains itself (remanet) through aIl these changes. In any corporeal Thing
the real entity is what is suited for thus remaining constant [stiindigen Verbleib],
so much so, indeed that this is how the substantiality of such a substance
gets characterized.
~ 20. Foundations of the Ontological Definition of the' World'

Substantiality is the idea ofBeing to which the ontological characterization of the res extensa harks back. "Per substantiam nihil aliud intelligere
possumus, quam rem quae ita existit, ut nulla alia re indigeat ad existendum." "By
substance we can understand nothing else than an entity which is in such
a way that it needs no other entity in order to be."x The Being of a 'substance' is characterized by not needing anything. That whose Being is
such that it has no need at aIl for any other entity satisfies the idea of
substance in the authentic sense; this entity is the ens perfectissimum.
" ... substantia quae nulla plane re indigeat, unica tantum potest intelligi, nempe
Deus."xi Here 'God' is a purely ontological term, ifit is to be understood
as ens perfectissimum. At the same time, the 'self-evident' connotation of
the concept of God is such as to permit an ontological interpretation for
the characteristic of not needing anything-a constitutive item in sub·
stantiality. "Alias vero omnes <res), non nisi ope concursus Dei existere posse
percipimus."xU AlI entities other than God need to be "produced" in the
widest sense and also to be sustained. 'Being' is to be understood within
a horizon which ranges from the production of what is to be present-athand to something which has no need of being produced. Every entity
which is not God is an ens creatum. The Being which belongs to one of these
entities is 'infinitely' different from that which belongs to the other; yet
we still consider creation and creator alike as entities. We are thus using
"Being" in so wide a sense that its meaning embraces an 'infinite' difference. So even created entities can be called "substance" with sorne right.
Relative to God, of course, these entities need to be produced and sustained; but within the realm of created entities-the 'world' in the sense
of ens creatum-there are things which 'are in need of no other entity'

92

Being and Time
I. 3
relatively to the creaturely production and sustentation that we find, for
instance, in man. Of these substances there are two kinds: the res cogitans
and the res extensa.
The Being of that substance whose distinctive proprietas is presented by
extensio thus becomes definable in principle ontologically if we clarify
the meaning of Being which is 'common' to the three kinds of substances, one
of them infinite, the others both finite. But"... nomen substantiae non convenit Deo et illis univoce ut dici solet inScholis, hoc est . .. quae Deo et creaturis
sit communis."xiU Here Descartes touches upon a problem with which
medieval ontology was often busied-the question of how the signification
of "Being" signifies any entity which one may on occasion be considering. In the assertions 'Gad is' and 'the world is', we assert Being.
This word 'is', however, cannot be meant to apply to these entities in the
same sense (crovwvvp-ws, univoce), when between them there is an infinite
difference of Being; if the signification of 'is' were univocal, then what is
created would be viewed as if it were uncreated, or the uncreated would
be reduced to the status of something created. But neither' does 'Being'
function as a mere name which is the same in both cases: in both cases
'Being' is understood. This positive sense in which 'Being' signifies is one
which the Schoolmen took as a signification 'by analogy', as distinguished
from one which is univocal or merely homonymous. Taking their departure from Aristotle, in whom this problem is foreshadowed in prototypical
form just as at the very outset of Greek ontology, they established various
kinds of analogy, so that even the 'Schools' have different ways of taking
the signification-function of "Being". In working out this problem ontologically, Descartes is always far behind the Schoolmen;xiv indeed he
evades the question. " ... nulla eius <substantiae> nominis significatio potest
distincte intelligi, quae Deo et creaturis sit communis."xv This evasion is tantamount to his failing to discuss the meaning of Being which the idea of
substantiality embraces, or the character of the 'universality' which belongs
to this signification. Of course even the ontology of the medievals has gone
no further than that of the ancients in inquiring into what "Being" itself
may mean. So it is not surprising if no headway is made with a question
like that of the way in which "Being" signifies, as long as this has to be
discussed on the basis of an unclarified meaning of Being which this
signification 'expresses'. The meaning remains unclarified because it is
held to be 'self-evident'.
Descartes not only evades the ontological question of substantiality
altogether; he also emphasizes explicitly that substance as such-that is
to say, its substantiality-is in and for itself inaccessible from the outset
[vorgangig]. "Verumtamen non potest substantia primum animadverti ex hoc solo,
126

93

94

J.3
Being and Time
127
quod sit res existens, quia hoc solum per se nos non afficit ... ".xvi 'Being' itself
does not 'affect' us, and therefore cannot be perceived. 'Being is not a
Real predicate,' says Kant, l who is merely repeating Descartes' principle.
Thus the possibility of a pure problematic of Being gets renounced in
principle, and a way is sought for arriving at those definite characteristics
of substance which we have designated above. Because 'Being' is not in
fact accessible as an entity, it is expressed through attributes---definite
characteristics of the entities under comideration, characteristics which
themselves are. 2 Being is not expressed through just any such characteristics, but rather through those satisfying in the purest manner that
meaning of "Being" and "substantiality", which has still been tacitly
presupposed. To the substantia finita as res corporea, what must primarily
be 'assigned' ["Zuweisung"] is the extensio. "Quin et jacilius intelligimus
substantiam extensam, vel substantiam cogitantcm, quam substantiam solam,
omisso eo quod cogitet vel sit extensa" ;xvu for substantiality is detachable
ratione tantum; it is not detachable realiter, nor can we come across it in
the way in which we come across those entities themselves which are
substantially.
Thus the ontological grounds for defining the 'world' as res extensa have
been made plain: they lie in the idea of substantiality, which not only
remains unclarified in the meaning of its Being, but gets passed off as
something incapable of clarification, and gets represented indirectly by
way of whatever substantial property belongs most pre-eminently to the
particular substance. Moreover, in this way of defining a substance
through sorne substantial entity, lies the reason why the term "substance"
is used in two ways. What is here intended is substantiality; and it get'l
understood in terms of a characteristic of substance-a characteristic
which is itself an entity.3 Because something ontical is made to underlie
the ontological, the expression "substantia" functions sometimes with a
signification which is ontological, sometimes with one which is ontical, but
mostly with one which is hazily ontico-ontological. Behind this slight
difference of signification, however, there lies hidden a failure to master
the basic problem of Being. To treat this adequately, we must 'track
down' the equivocations in the right way. He who attempts this sort of
thing does not just 'busy himself' with 'merely verbal significations'; he
must venture forward into the most primordial problematic of the 'things
themselves' to get such 'nuances' straightened out.
1 Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure &ason, Transcendental Dialectic, Book II, chapter III,
Section 4.
li ' ••• seiende Bestimmtheiten des betreffenden Seienden .. .'
3
aus einer seienden Beschaffenheit der Substanz.'
'0

0

0

95

Being and Time
I. 3
~ 2 I. Hermeneutical Discussion of the Cartesian Ontology of the 'World'
The critical question now arises: does this ontology of the 'world' seek
the phenomenon of the world at all, and if not, does it at least define some
entity within-the-world fully enough so that the worldly character of this
entity can be made visible in it? To both questions we must answer "No". The
entity which Descartes is trying to grasp ontologically and in principle
with his "extensio", is rather such as to become discoverable first of all by
going through an entity within-the-world which is proximally ready-tohand-Nature. Though this is the case, and though any ontological
characterization of this latter entity within-the-world may lead us into
obscurity, even if we consider both the idea of substantiality and the
meaning of the "existit" and "ad existendum" which have been brought
into the definition of that idea, it still remains possible that through an
ontology based upon a radical separation ofGod, the "1", and the 'world',
the ontological problem of the world will in some sense get formulated
and further advanced. If, however, this is not possible, we must then
demonstrate explicitly not only that Descartes' conception of the world
is ontologically defective, but that his Interpretation and the foundations
on which it is based have led him to pass over both the phenomenon of the
world and the Being of those entities within-the-world which are proximally ready-to-hand.
ln our exposition of the problem of worldhood (Section 14), we suggested the importance of obtaining proper access to this phenomenon. So
in criticizing the Cartesian point of departure, we must ask which kind
of Being that be10ngs to Dasein we should fix upon as giving us an appropriate way of access to those entities with whose Being as extensio Descartes
equates the Being of the 'world'. The only genuine access to them lies in
knowing [Erkennen], intellectio, in the sense of the kind of knowledge
[Erkenntnis] we get in mathematics and physics. Mathematical knowledge
is regarded by Descartes as the one manner of apprehending entities
which can always give assurance that their Being has been secure1y
grasped. If anything measures up in its own kind of Being to the Being
that is accessible in mathematical knowledge, then it is in the authentic
sense. Such entities are those which always are what they are. Accordingly,
that .which can be shown to have the character of something that constantly
remazns (as remanens capax mutationum), makes up the real Being of those
entities of the world which get experienced. That which enduringly
remains, really is. This is the sort of thing which mathematics knows.
That which is accessible in an entity through mathematics, makes up its
Being. Thus the Being of the 'world' is, as it were, dictated to it in terms
ofa definite idea of Being which lies veiled in the concept of substantiality,
128

96

I. 3
Being and Time
129
and in terms of the idea of a knowledge by which such entities are
cognized. The kind of Being which belongs to entities within-the-world
is something which they themsclves might have been permitted to present;
but Descartes does not let them do SO.l Instead he prescribes for the world
its 'real' Being, as it were, on the basis of an idea of Being whose source
has not been unveiled and which has not been demonstrated in its own
right-an idea in which Being is equated with constant presence-at-hand.
Thus his ontology of the world is not primarily determined by his leaning
towards mathematics, a science which he chances to esteem very
highly, but rather by his ontological orientation in principle towards
Being as constant presence-at-hand, which mathematical knowledge
is exceptionally well suited to grasp. In this way Descartes explicitly
switches over philosophically from the deve10pment of traditional
ontology to modern mathematical physics and its transcendental
foundations.
The problem of how to get appropriate access to entities within-theworld is one which Descartes fee1s no necd to raise. Under the unbroken
ascendance of the traditional ontology, the way to get a genuine grasp
of what really i s [des eigentlichen Seienden] has been decided in advance:
it lies in vO€Îv-'beholding' in the widest sense [der "Anschauung" im
weitesten Sinne]; Stavo€Îv or 'thinking' is just a more fully achieved
form of Vo€Îv and is founded upon it. Sensatio (a'ta87Jats), as opposed to
intellectio, still remains possible as a way of access to entities by a beholding
which is perceptual in character; but Descartes presents his 'critique' of
it because he is oriented ontologically by these principles.
Descartes knows very well that entities do not proximally show themselves in their real Being. What is 'proximally' given is this waxen Thing
which is coloured, fiavoured, hard, and cold in definite ways, and which
gives off its own special sound when struck. But this is not of any importance ontologically, nor, in general, is anything which is given through the
senses. "Satis erit, si advertamus sensuum perceptiones non rejerri, nisi ad istam
corporis humani cum mente coniunctionem, et nobis quidem ordinarie exhibere, quid
ad illam externa corpora prodesse possint aut nocere ..• "xviii The senses do not
enable us to cognize any entity in its Being; they mere1y serve to announce
the ways in which 'external' Things within-the-world are useful or harmfuI for human creatures encumbered with bodies. " ... non ••• nos docere,
qualia corpora) in seipsis existant" ;Xix they tell us nothing about entities
in their Being. "Quod agentes, percipiemus naturam materiae, sive corporis in
universum spectati, non consistere in eo quod sit res dura, vel ponderosa, vel colorata,

<

1 'Descartes liisst sich nicht die Seinsart des innerweltlichen Seienden von diesem
vorgeben .. .'

97

Being and Time
1. 3
vel alio aliquo modo sensus afficiens: sed tantum in eo quod sit res extensa in longum,
latum et profundum. "xx
Ifwe subject Descartes' Interpretation of the experience ofhardness and
resistance to a critical analysis, it will be plain how unable he is to let
what shows itself in sensation present itself in its own kind of Being,l or
even to determine its character (Cf. Section Ig).
Hardness gets taken as resistance. But neither hardness nor resistance
is understood in a phenomenal sense, as something experienced in itself
whose nature can be determined in such an experience. For Descartes,
resistance amounts to no more than not yielding place-that is, not
undergoing any change of location. So if a Thing resists, this means that
it stays in a definite location relatively to sorne other Thing which is
changing its location, or that it is changing its own location with a velocity
which permits the other Thing to 'catch up' with it. But when the experience ofhardness is Interpreted this way, the kind of Being which belongs
to sensory perception is obliterated, and so is any possibility that the
entities encountered in such perception should be grasped in their Being.
Descartes takes the kind of Being which belongs to the perception of
something, and translates it into the only kind he knows: the perception
of something becomes a definite way of Being-present-at-hand-side-byside of two res extensae which are present-at-hand; the way in which their
movements are related is itself a mode of that extensio by which the
presence-at-hand of the corporeal Thing is primarily characterized. Of
course no behaviour in which one feels one's way by touch [eines tastenden
Verhaltens] can be 'completed' unless what can thus be felt [des Betastbaren] has 'closeness' of a very special kind. But this does not mean that
touching [Berührung] and the hardness which makes itself known in
touching consist ontologically in different velocities of two corporeal
Things. Hardness and resistance do not show themselves at aIl unless an
entity has the kind ofBeing which Dasein-or at least something livingpossesses.
Thus Descartes' discussion of possible kinds of access to entities withinthe-world is dominated by an idea of Being which has been gathered from
a definite realm of these entities themselves.
The idea of Being as permanent presence-at-hand not only gives
Descartes a motive for identifying entities within-the-world with the world
in general, and for providing so extreme a definition of their Being; it
also keeps him from bringing Dasein's ways of behaving into view in a
manner which is ontologically appropriate. But thus the road is completely
130

98

l ' • • • das in der Sinnlichkeit sich Zeigende in seiner eigenen Seinsart sich vorgeben
zu lassen .. .'

III. 3

Being and Time
13 1
blocked to seeing the founded character of aIl sensory and intellective
awareness, and to understanding these as possibilities of Being-in-theworld. 1 On the contrary, he takes the Being of 'Dasein' (to whose basic
constitution Being-in-the-world belongs) in the very same way as he takes
the Being of the res extensa-namely, as substance.
But with these criticisms, have we not fobbed off on Descartes a task
altogether beyond his horizon, and then gone on to 'demonstrate' that
he has failed to solve it? If Descartes does not know the phcnomenon of
the world, and thus knows no such thing as within-the-world-ness, how
can he identify the world itselfwith certain entities within-the-world and
the Being which they possess?
ln controversy over principles, one must not only attach oneself to
theses which can be grasped doxographicaIly; one must also derive onc's
orientation from the objective tendency of the problematic, even if it
does not go beyond a rather ordinary way oftaking things. In his doctrine
of the res cogitans and the res extensa, Descartes not only wants to formulate
the problem of 'the "1" and the world'; he daims to have solved it in a
radical manner. His Meditations make this plain. (Sec especially Meditations 1 and VI.) Bytaking his basicontologicalorientation from traditional
sources and not subjecting it to positive criticism, he has made it impossible to lay bare any primordial ontological problematic of Dasein; this
has inevitably obstructed his view of the phenomenon of the world, and
has made it possible for the ontology of the 'world' to be compressed into
that of certain entities within-the-world. The foregoing discussion should
have proved this.
One might retort, however, that even ifin point offact both the problem
of the world and the Being of the entities encountered environmentally
as dosest to us remain concealed, Descartes has still laid the basis for
characterizing ontologically that entity within-the-world upon which, in
its very Being, every other entity is founded-material Nature. This would
be the fundamental stratum upon which aIl the other strata of actuality
within-the-world are built up. The extended Thing as such would serve,
in the first instance, as the ground for those definite characters which
show themselves, to be sure, as qualities, but which 'at bottom' are
quantitative modifications of the modes of the extensio itself. These
qualities, which are themselves reducible, would provide the footing for
such specific qualities as "beautiful", "ugly", "in keeping", "not in
l 'Damit ist aber vollends der Weg dazu verlegt, gar auch nocb den fundierten Charakter
alles sinnlichen und verstandesmiissigen Vernehmens zu sehen und sie ais eine Moglichkeit
des In-der-We1t-seins zu verstehen.' While we have construed the pronoun 'sie' as referring to the two kinds of awareness which have just been mentioned, it would be
grammatically more plausible to interpret it as referring either to 'Dasein's ways of
behaving' or to 'the idea of Being as permanent presence-at-hand'.

99

100

132
Being and Time
I. 3
keeping," "useful", "useless". If one is oriented primarily by Thinghood,
these latter qualities must be taken as non-quantifiable value-predicates
by which what is in the first instance just a material Thing, gets stamped
as something good. But with this stratification, we come to those entities
which we have characterized ontologically as equipment ready-to-hand
The Cartesian analysis of the 'world' would thus enable us for the first
time to build up securely the structure of what is proximally ready-tohand; aIl it takes is to round out the Thing of Nature until it becomes a
full-fledged Thing of use, and this is easily done.
But quite apart from the specifie problem of the world itself, can the
Being of what we encounter proximally within-the-world be reached
ontologically by this procedure? When we speak of material Thinghood,
have we not tacitly posited a kind of Being-the constant presence-at
hand ofThings-which is so far from having been rounded out ontologicaUy by subsequently endowing entities with value-predicates, that these
value-characters themselves are rather just ontical characteristics of those
entities which have the kind of Being possessed by Things? Adding on
value-predicates cannot tell us anything at aIl new about the Being of
goods, but would merery presuppose again that goods have pure presence-at-hand
as their kiruI of Being. Values would then be determinate characteristics
which a Thing possesses, and they would be present-at-hand. They would
have their sole ultimate ontological source in our previously laying down
the actuality of Things as the fundamental stratum. But even prephenomenological experience shows that in an entity which is supposedly
a Thing, there is something that will not become fully intelligible through
Thinghood alone. Thus the Being of Things has to be rounded out.
What, then does the Being ofvalues or their 'validity' ["Geltung"] (which
Lotze took as a mode of 'affirmation') really amount to ontologically?
And what does it signify ontologically for Things to be 'invested' with
values in this way? As long as these matters remain obscure, to reconstruct
the Thing of use in terms of the Thing of Nature is an ontologically
questionable undertaking, even if one disregards the way in which the
problematic has been perverted in principle. And if we are to reconstruct
this Thing of use, which supposedly cornes to us in the first instance 'with
its skin off', does not this always require that we previousry take a positive look
at the phenomenon whose totality such a reconstruction is to restore? But if we have
not given a proper explanation beforehand of its ownmost state of Being,
are we not building our reconstruction without a plan? Inasmuch as this
reconstruction and 'rounding-out' ofthe traditional ontology of the 'world'
results in our reaching the same entities with which we started when we
analysed the readiness-to-hand of equipment and the totality of

J. 3
Being and Time
133
involvements, it seems as if the Being of these entities has in fact been
c1arified or hasatleastbecomeaproblem.But bytaking extensio as aproprietas,
Descartes can hardly reach the Being of substance; and by taking refuge
in 'value'-characteristics ["wertlichen" Beschaffenheiten] we are just
as far from even catching a glimpse of Being as readiness-to-hand, let
alone permitting it to become an ontological theme.
Descartes has narrowed down the question of the world to that of
Things of Nature [Naturdinglichkeit] as those entities within-the-world
which are proximally accessible. He has confirmed the opinion that to
know an entity in what is supposedly the most rigorous ontical manner is
our only possible access to the primary Being of the entity which such
knowledge reveals. But at the same time we must have the insight to
see that in principle the 'roundings-out' of the Thing-ontology also
operate on the same dogmatic basis as that which Descartes has adopted.
We have already intimated in Section 14 that passing over the world
and those entities which we proximally encounter is not accidentaI, not
an oversight which it would be simple to correct, but that it is grounded
in a kind of Being which belongs essentially to Dasein itself. When our
analytic of Dasein has given sorne transparency to those main structures
of Dasein which are of the most importance in the framework of this
problematic, and when we have assigned [zugewiesen] to the concept of
Being in general the horizon within which its intelligibility becomes
possible, so that readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand also become
primordially intelligible ontologically for the first time, only then can our
critique of the Cartesian ontology of the world (an ontology which, in
principle, is still the usual one today) come philosophically into its own.
To do this, we must show several things. (See Part One, Division
Three.)l
1. Why was the phenomenon of the world passed over at the beginning
of the ontological tradition which has been decisive for us (explicitly
in the case of Parmenides), and why has this passing-over kept
constantly recurring?
2. Why is it that, instead of the phenomenon thus passed over, entities
within-the-world have intervened as an ontological theme?ll
3. Why are these entities found in the first instance in 'Nature'?
4. Why has recourse been taken to the phenomenon of value when it
has seemed necessary to round out such an ontology of the world?
1 This Division has never been published.
li 'Warum springt iùr das übersprungene Phiinomen das innerweltlich Seiende aIs
ontologisches Thema ein?' The verbal playon 'überspringen' ('pass over') and 'einspringen' ('intervene' or 'serve as a deputy') is lost in translation. On 'einspringen' see our
note l, p. 158, H. 122 below.

101

134
Being and Time
I. 3
In the answers to these questions a positive understanding of the problematie of the world will be reached for the first time, the sources of our failure
to recognize it will be exhibited, and the ground for rejecting the traditional ontology of the world will have been demonstrated.
The world and Dasein and entities within-the-world are the ontologically constitutive states which are closest to us; but we have no guarantee
that we can achieve the basis for meeting up with these as phenomena by
the seemingly obvious procedure of starting with the Things of the world,
still less by taking our orientation from what is supposedly the most
rigorous knowledge of entities. Our observations on Descartes should have
brought us this insight.
But if we recall that spatiality is manifestly one of the constituents of
entities within-the-world, then in the end the Cartesian analysis of the
'world' can still be 'rescued'. When Descartes was so radical as to set up
the extensio as the praesuppositum for every definite characteristic of the res
eorporea, he prepared the way for the understanding of something a priori
whose content Kant was to establish with greater penetration. Within
certain limits the analysis of the extensio remains independent of his
neglecting to provide an explicit interpretation for the Being of extended
entities. There is sorne phenomenal justification for regarding the extensio
as a basic characteristic of the 'world', even if by recourse to this neither
the spatiality of the world nor that of the entities we encounter in our
environment (a spatiality which is proximally discovered) nor even that
of Dasein itself, can be conceived ontologically.

c. The Aroundness ofthe Environment l and Dasein's Spatiality
In connection with our first preliminary sketch of Being-in (See Section
12), we had to contrast Dasein with a way ofBeing in space which we calI
"insideness" [Inwendigkeit]. This expression means that an entity which
is itself extended is closed round [umschl Jssen] by the extended boundaries
of something that is likewise extended. The entity inside [Das inwendig
Seiende] and that which closes it round are both present-at-hand in space.
Yet even if we deny that Dasein has any such insideness in a spatial
receptacle, this does not in principle exclude it from having any spatiality
at aIl, but merely keeps open the way for seeing the kind of spatiality
which is constitutive for Dasein. This must now be set forth. But inasmuch
as any entity within-the-world is likewise in space, its spatiality will have
an ontological connection with the world. We must therefore determine
in what sense space is a constituent for that world which has in turn been
characterized as an item in the structure of Being-in-the-world. In particular
l 'Das Umhafte der Umwelt'. See our note l, p. 93, H. 65 above,

J. 3
Being and Time
135
we must show how the aroundness of the environment, the specifie
spatiality of entities encountered in the environment, is founded upon
the worldhood of the world, while contrariwise the world, on its part, is
not present-at-hand in space. Our study of Dasein's spatiality and the
way in which the world is spatially determined will take its departure
from an analysis ofwhat is ready-to-hand in space within-the-world. We
shall consider three topies: 1. the spatiality of the ready-to-hand withinthe-world (Section 22); 2. the spatiality of Being-in-the-world (Section
23); 3. space and the spatiality of Dasein (Section 24).

of the Ready-to-hand Within-the-world
If space is constitutive for the world in a sense which we have yet to
determine, then it cannot surprise us that in our foregoing ontological
characterization of the Being of what is within-the-world we have had
to look upon this as something that is also within space. This spatiality of
the ready-to-hand is something which we have not yet grasped explicitly
as a phenomenon; nar have we pointed out how it is bound up with the
structure of Being which belongs to the ready-to-hand. This is now our
task.
To what extent has our characterization of the ready-to-hand already
come up against its spatiality? We have been talking about what is
proximally ready-to-hand. This means not only those entities which we
encounter first before any others, but also those which are 'close by'.l
What is ready-to-hand in our everyday dealings has the character of
closeness. To be exact, this closeness of equipment has already been
intimated in the term 'readiness-to-hand', which expresses the Being of
equipment. Every entity. that is 'to hand' has a different closeness, which
is not to be ascertained by measuring distances. This closeness regulates
itself in terms of circumspectively 'calculative' manipulating and using.
At the same time what is close in this way gets established by the circumspection of concern, with regard to the direction in which the equipment
is accessible at any time. When this closeness of the equipment has been
given directionality, 2 this signifies not merely that the equipment has its
~ 22. The Spatiality

l'in der Niihe.' While the noun 'Niihe' often means the 'closeness' or 'nearness' of something that is close to us, it can also stand for our immediate 'vicini!,y', as in the present
expression, and in many passages it can be interpreted either way. We shaH in general
translate it as 'c1oseness', but we shaH translate 'in der Niihe' and simiJar phrases as
'close by'.
2 'Die ausgerichtete Niihe des Zeugs .. .' The verb 'ausrichten' has many specialized
meanings-to 'align'· a row of troops, to 'explore' a mine, to 'make arrangements' for
something, to 'carry out' a commission, etc. Heidegger, however, keeps its root meaning
in mind and associates it with the word 'Richtung' ('direction', 'route to be taken',
etc.). We shaH accordingly translate it as a rule by sorne form of the verb 'direct' (which
will also be used occasionally for the verb 'richten'), or by sorne compound expression
involving the word 'directional'. For further discussion, see H. 108 If. below.

102

136

103

Being and Time

1. 3

position [Stelle] in space as present-at-hand somewhere, but also that as
equipment it has been essentially fitted up and installed, set up, and put
to rights. Equipment has its place [Platz], or else it 'lies around'; this must
be distinguished in principle from just occurring at random in some
spatial position. When equipment for something or other has its place,
this place defines itself as the place of this equipment-as one place out
of a whole totality of places directionally lined up with each other and
belonging to the context of equipment that is environmentally ready-tohand. Such a place and such a muliplicity of places are not to be interpreted as the "where" of sorne random Being-present-at-hand of Things.
In each case the place is the definite 'there' or 'yonder' ["Dort" und
"Da"] of an item of equipment which belongs somewhere. Its belongingsomewhere at the time [Die jeweilige Hingeh6righeit] corresponds to the
equipmental character of what is ready-to-hand; that is, it corresponds to
the belonging-to [ZugehOrigkeit] which the ready-to-hand has towards a
totality of equipment in accordance with its involvements. But in general
the "whither" to which the totality of places for a context of equipment
gets allotted, is the undcrlying condition which makes possible the belonging-somewhere ofan equipmental totality as something that can be placed.
This "whither", which makes it possible for equipment to belong somewhere, and which we circumspectively keep in view ahead of us in our
concernful dealings, we calI the "region".1
'In the region of' means not only 'in the direction of' but also within
the range [Umkreis] of something that lies in that direction. The kind of
place which is constituted by direction and remoteness 2 (and closeness
is only a mode of the latter) is already oriented towards a region and
oriented within it. Something like a region must first be discovered if
there is to be any possibility of allotting or coming across places for a
totality of equipment that is circumspectively at one's disposaI. The
regional orientation of the multiplicity of places belonging to the readyto-hand goes to make up the aroundness-the "round-about-us" [das
Um-uns-herum]--ofthose entities which we encounter as closest environmentally. A three-dimensional multiplicity of possible positions which
gets filled up with Things present-at-hand is never proximally given. This
dimensionality of space is still veiled in the spatiality of the ready-to-hand.
The 'above' is what is 'on the ceiling'; the 'below' is what is 'on the ftoor' ;
l 'Gegend'. There is no English word which quite corresponds to 'Gegend'. 'Region'
and 'whereaboul" perhaps come the c1osest, and we have chosen the former as the more
convenient. (Heidegger himself frequently uses the word 'Region', but he does so in
contexts where 'realm' seems to be the most appropriate translation; we have usually so
translated it, leaving the English 'region' for 'Gegend'.)
2 '~ntferntheit'. For further discussion, see Section 23 and our note 2, p. 138, H. 105.

I. 3
Being and Time
137
the 'behind' is what is 'at the door'; aIl "wheres" are discovered and
circumspectively interpreted as we go our ways in everyday dealings;
they are not ascertained and catalogued by the observational measurement of space.
Regions are not first formed by things which are. present-at-hand
together; they always are ready-to-hand already in individual places.
Places themselves either get allotted to the ready-to-hand in the circumspection of concern, or we come across them. Thus anything constantly
ready-to-hand of which circumspective Being-in-the-world takes account
beforehand, has its place. The "where" of its readiness-to-hand is put to
account as a matter for concern, and oriented towards the l'est of what is
ready-to-hand. Thus the sun, whose light and warmth are in everyday
use, has its own places-sunrise, midday, sunset, midnight; these are
discovered in circumspection and treated distinctively in terms of changes
in the usability of what the sun bestows. Here we have something which
is ready-to-hand with uniform constancy, although it keeps éhanging; its
places become accentuated 'indicators' of the regions which lie in them.
These celestial regions, which need not have any geographical meaning as
yet, provide the "whither" beforehand for everyl special way of giving
form to the regions which places can occupy. The house has its sunny side
and its shady side; the way it is divided up into 'rooms' ["Raume"] is
oriented towards these, and so is the 'arrangement' ["Einrichtung"]
within them, according to their character as equipment. Churches and
graves, for instance, are laid out according to the rising and the setting
of the sun-the regions of life and death, which are determinative for
Dasein itselfwith regard to its ownmost possibilities of Being in the world.
Dasein, in its very Being, has this Being as an issue; and its concern discovers beforehand those regions in which some involvement is decisive.
This discovery ofregions beforehand is co-determined [mitbestimmt] by
the totality of involvements for which the ready-to-hand, as something
encountered, is freed.
The readiness-to-hand which belongs to any such region beforehand
has the character of inconspicuous familiarity, and it has it in an even more
primordial sense than does the Being of the ready-to-hand. 2 The region
itself becomes visible in a conspicuous manner only when one discovers
1 Reading 'jede' with the later editions. The earliest editions have 'je', which has been
corrected in the list of errata.
2 'Die vorgangige Zuhandenheit der jeweiligen Gegend hat in einem noch ursprünglicheren Sinne aIs das Sein des Zuhandenen den Charakter der unauffiilligen Vertrautheit.'
Here the phrase 'aIs das Sein des Zuhandenen' is ambiguously placed. In the light of
Section 16 above, we have interpreted 'al~' as 'than' rather than 'as', and have treated 'das
Sein' as a nominative rather than an accusative. But other readings are grammatica1ly
just as possible.

104

138

Being and Time
J.3
the ready-to-hand circumspectively and does so in the deficient modes of
concern. 1 Often the region of a place does not become accessible explicidy
as such a region until one fails to find something in ils place. The space
which is discovered in circumspective Being-in-the-world as the spatiality
of the totality of.equipment, always belongs to entities themselves as the
place of that totality. The bare space itself is still veiled over. Space has
been split up into places. But this spatiality has its own unity through
that totality-of-involvements in-accordance-with-the-world [weltmassige]
which belongs to the spatially ready-to-hand. The 'environment' does
not arrange itself in a space which has been given in advance; but its
specifie worldhood, in its significance, Articulates the context of involvements which belongs to sorne CUITent totality of circumspectively allotted
places. The world at such a time always reveals the spatiality of the space
which belongs to it. To encounter the ready-to-hand in its environmental
space remains ontically possible only because Dasein itself is 'spatial' with
regard to its Being-in-the-world.
~ 23. The Spatiality of Being-in-the-world

105

If we attribute spatiality to Dasein, then this 'Being in space' must
manifesdy he conceived in terms of the kind of Being which that entity
possesses. Dasein is essentially not a Being-present-at-hand; and its
"spatiality" cannot signify anything like occurrence at a position in
'world-space', nor can it signify Being-ready-to-hand at sorne place. Both
of these are kinds of Being which belong to entities encountered withinthe-world. Dasein, however, is 'in' the world in the sense that it deals
with entities encountered within-the-world, and does so concernfully and
with familiarity. So if spatiality belongs to it in any way, that is possible
only because of this Being-in. But its spatiality shows the characters of
de-severance and directionality. 2
l'Sie wird selbst nur sichtbar in der Weise des Auffallens bei einem umsichtigen
Entdecken des Zuhandenen und zwar in den defizienten Modi des Besorgens.' This
sentence too is ambiguous. The pronoun 'Sie' may refer either to the region, as we have
suggested, or to its readiness-Io-hand. Furthermore, while we have taken 'nur sichtbar in
der Weise des Auffallens' as a unit, it is possible that 'in der Weise des Auffallens'
should be construed as going with the words that follow. In this case we should read:
' •.• becomes visible only when it becomes conspicuous in our circumspective discovery
of the ready-to-hand, and indeed in the deficient modes of concern.'
2 'Ent-fernung und Ausrichtung.' The nouns 'Entfernung' and 'Entfernheit' can usually be
translated by 'removing', 'removal', 'remoteness', or even 'distance'. In this passage
however, Heidegger is calling attention to the fact that these words are derived from th~
stem 'fern-' ('far' or 'distant') and the privative prefix 'ent-'. Usually this prefix would he
construed as merely intensifying the notion of separation or distance expressed in the
'fern-'; but Heidegger chooses to construe it as more strictly privative, so that the verb
'entfernen' will be taken to mean abolishing a distance or farness rather than enhancing it.
It is as ifby the very act ofrecognizing the 'remoteness' ofsomething, we have in a sense
brought it doser and made it less 'remote'.
Apparently there is no word in English with an etymological structure quite parallel

Being and Time
139
When we speak of deseverance as a kind of Being which Dasein has with
regard to its Being-in-the-world, we do not understand by it any such
thing as remoteness (or closeness) or even a distance. 1 We use the expression "deseverance"* in a signification which is both active and transitive.
It stands for a constitutive state of Dasein's Being-a state with regard
to which removing something in the sense of putting it away is only a
determinate factical mode. "De-severing"* amounts to making the farness
vanish-that is, making the remoteness of something disappear, bringing
it close. 2 Dasein is essentially de-severant: it lets any entity be encountered
close by as the entity which it is. De-severance discovers remoteness; and
remoteness, like distance, is a determinate categorial characteristic of
entities whose nature is not that of Dasein. De-severance*, however, is
an existentiale; this must be kept in mind. Only to the extent that entities
are revealed for Dasein in their deseveredness [Entferntheit], do 'remotenesses' ["Entfernungen"] and distances with regard to other things
become accessible in entities within-the-world themselves. Two points are
just as litde desevered from one another as two Things, for neither ofthese
types of entity has the kind of Being which would make it capable of
desevering. They merely have a measurable distance between them,
which we can come across in our de-severing.
Proximally and for the most part, de-severing 3 is a circumspective

I. 3

to that of 'entfernen'; perhaps 'dissever' cornes the nearest, for this too is a verb of separation in which a privative prefix is used as an intensive. We have coined the similar verb
'desever' in the hope that this will suggest Heidegger's meaning when 'remove' and its
derivatives seem inappropriate. But with 'desever', one cannot slip back and forth from
one sense to another as easily as one can with 'entfernen'; so we have resorted to the
expedient ofusing both 'desever' and 'remove' and their derivatives, depending upon the
sense we fee! is intended. Thus 'entfernen' will generally be rendered by 'remove' or
'desever', 'entfernt' by 'remote' or 'desevered'. Since Heidegger is careful to distinguish
'Entfernung' and 'Entferntheit', we shall usually translate these by 'deseverance' and
'remoteness' respective!y; in the few cases where these translations do not seem appropriate, we shall subjoin the German word in brackets.
Our problem is further complicated by Heidegger's practise of occasionally putting a
hyphen after the prefix 'ent-', presumably to emphasize its privative character. In such
cases we shall write 'de-sever', 'de-severance', etc. Unfortunate!y, however, there are
typographical discrepancies between the earlier and later editions. Som~ of the earlier
hyphens occur at the ends of lines and have been either intentionally or inadvertently
omitted in resetting the type; sorne appear at the end of the line in the later editions, but
not in the earlier ones; others have this position in both editions. We shall indicate each
of these ambiguous cases with an asterisk, supplying a hyphen only if there seems to be a
good reason for doing 50.
On 'Ausrichtung' see our note 2, p. 135, H. 102 above.
l'Abstand'. Heidegger uses three words which might be translated as 'distance':
'Ferne' (our 'farness'), 'Entfernung' (our 'deseverance'), and 'Abstand' ('distance' in the
sense of a measurable interval). We shall reserve 'distance' for 'Abstand'.
2 'Entfernen* besagt ein Verschwindenmachen der Ferne, d. h. der Entferntheit von
etwas, Naherung.'
8 This hyphen is found only in the later editions.

Being and Time
J. 3
bringing-close-bringing something close by, in the sense of procuring it,
putting it in readiness, having it to hand. But certain ways in which
entities are discovered in a purely cognitive manner also have the character
of bringing them close. In Dasein tJzere lies an essential tendency towards
closeness. Ali the ways in which we speed things up, as we are more or less
compelled to do today, push us on towards the conquest of remoteness.
With the 'radio', for example, Dasein has so expanded its everyday
environment that it has accomplished a de-severance of the 'world'a de-severance which, in its meaning for Dasein, cannot yet be
visualized.
De-severing does not necessarily imply any explicit estimation of the
famess of something ready-to-hand in relation to Dasein. Above aIl,
remoteness* never gets taken as a distance. If famess is to be estimated,
this is done relatively to deseverances in which everyday Dasein maintains
itself. Though these estimates may be imprecise and variable if we try
to compute them, in the everydayness of Dasein they have their own
definiteness which is thoroughly intelligible. We say that to go over yonder
is "a good walk", "a stone's throw", or 'as long as it takes to smoke a
pipe'. These measures express not only that they are not intended to
'measure' anything but also that the remoteness* here estimated belongs
to some entity to which one goes with concernful circumspection. But
even when we avail ourselves ofa fixed measure and say 'it is half an hour
to the house', this measure must be taken as an estimate. 'Half an hour'
is not thirty minutes, but a duration [Dauer] which has no 'length' at
aIl in the sense of a quantitative stretch. Such a duration is always interpreted in terms of well-accustomed everyday ways in which we 'make
provision' ["Besorgungen"]. Remotenesses* are estimated proximally by
circumspection, even when one is quite familiar with 'officially' calculated measures. Since what is de-severed in such estimates is ready-tohand, it retains its character as specifically within-the-world. This even
implies that the pathways we take towards desevered entities in the
course of our dealings will vary in their length from day to day. What
is ready-to-hand in the environment is certainly not present-at-hand
for an eternal observer exempt from Dasein: but it is encountered
in Dasein's circumspectively concernful everydayness. As Dasein
goes along its ways, it does not measure off a stretch of space
as a corporeal Thing which is present-at-hand; it does not 'devour
the kilometres'; bringing-close or de-severance is always a kind of concernful Being towards what is brought close and de-severed. A pathway
which is long 'Objectively' can he much shorter than one which is
'Objectively' shorter still but which is perhaps 'hard going' and comes
140

106

J. 3
Being and Time
141
before us l as interminably long. ret onry in thus 'coming before US'1 is the
cu"ent world authenticalry ready-to-hand. The Objective distances of Things
present-at-hand do not coincide with the remoteness and closeness of
what is ready-to-hand within-the-world. Though we may know these
distances exactly, this knowledge still remains blind; it does not have the
function of discovering the environment circumspectively and bringing it
close; this knowledge is used only in and for a concernful Being which
does not measure stretches-a Being towards the world that 'matters' to
one [..• Sein zu der einen "angehenden" Welt].
When one is oriented beforehand towards 'Nature' and 'Objectively'
measured distances of Things, one is inclined to pass off such estimates
and interpretations of deseverance as 'subjective'. Yet this 'subjectivity'
perhaps uncovers the 'Reality' of the world at its most Real; it has nothing
to do with 'subjective' arbitrariness or subjectivistic 'ways of taking' an
entity which 'in itself' is otherwise. The circumspective de-severing of Dasein's
everydayness reveals the Being-in-itseif of the 'true world'-of that entiry which
Dasein, as something existing, is already alongside. 2
When one is primarily and even exclusively oriented towards remotenesses as measured distances, the primordial spatiality of Being-in is
concealed. That which is presumably 'closest' is by no means that which
is at the smallest distance 'from us'. 1t lies in that which is desevered to an
average extent when we reach for it, grasp it, or look at it. Because Dasein
is essentially spatial in the way of de-severance, its dealings always keep
within an 'environment' which is desevered from it with a certain leeway
[Spielraum]; accordingly our seeing and hearing always go proximally
beyond what is distantially 'closest'. Seeing and hearing are distancesenses [Femsinne] not because they are far-reaching, but because it is in
them that Dasein as deseverant mainly dwells. When, for instance, a man
wears a pair of spectacles which are so close to him distantially that they
are 'sitting on his nose', they are environmentally more remote from hiin
than the picture on the opposite wall. Such equipment has so little
closeness that often it is proximaUy quite impossible to find. Equipment
for seeing-and likewise for hearing, such as the telephone receiver-has
what we have designated as the inconspicuousness of the proximally readyto-hand. So too, for instance, does the street, as equipment for walking.
One feels the touch of it at every step as one walks; it is seemingly the
. closest and Realest of aIl that is ready-to-hand, and it slides itself, as it
l 'v~rkom~t'j '''Vorkommen'' '. In ~eneral 'yorkommen' May be translated as
occur, and IS to ~e .though~ of as apphcable strtctly to the present-at-hand. In this
passage, however, It 1& apphed to the ready-to-hand; and a translation which calls
attention to its etymological structure seems to be called for.
Il 'Das umsichtige Ent-fernen der AlltligZichkeit des Daseins entdeckt das An-sich-sein der "wahren
WeZt", des Seienden, bei dem Dasein ais existierendes je schon ist.'
•

1°7

108

142
Being and Time
I. 3
were, along certain portions of one's body-the soles of one's feet. And
yet it is farther remote than the acquaintance whom one encounters 'on
the street' at a 'remoteness' ["Entfernung"] of twenty paces when one is
taking such a walk. Circumspective concern decides as to the closeness
and farness of what is proximally ready-to-hand environmentaIly. Whatever this concern dwells alongside beforehand is what is closest, and this
is what regulates our de-severances.
If Dasein, in its concern, brings something close by, this does not signify
that it fixes something at a spatial position with a minimal distance from
some point of the body. When something is close by, this means that it is
within the range of what is proximally ready-to-hand for circumspection.
Bringing-close is not oriented towards the 1-Thing encumbered with a
body, but towards concernful Being-in-the-world-that is, towards whatever is proximally encountered in such Being. It follows, moreover, that
Dasein's spatiality is not to be defined by citing the position at which
some corporeal Thing is present-at-hand. Of course we say that even
Dasein always occupies a place. But this 'occupying' must be distinguished
in principle from Being-ready-to-hand at a place in some particular
region. Occupying a place must be conceived as a desevering of the
environmentally ready-to-hand into a region which has been circumspectively discovered in advance. Dasein understands its "here" [Hier] in
terms of its environmental "yonder". The "here" does not mean the
"where" ofsomething present-at-hand, but rather the "whereat" [Wobei]
of a de-severant Being-alongside, together with this de-severance. Dasein,
in accordance with its spatiality, is proximally never here but yonder;
from this "yonder" it comes back to its "here"; and it comes back to its
"here" only in the way in which it interprets its concernful Beingtowards in terms of what is ready-to-hand yonder. This becomes quite
plain if we consider a certain phenomenal peculiarity of the de-severance
structure of Being-in.
As Being-in-the-world, Dasein maintains itself essentially in a desevering. This de-severance-the farness of the ready-to-hand from Dasein
itself-is something that Dasein can never cross over. Of course the remoteness of something ready-to-hand from Dasein can show up as a distance
from it,l if this remoteness is determined by a relation to some Thing
which gets thought of as present-at-hand at the place Dasein has formerly
occupied. Dasein can subsequently traverse the "between" ofthis distance,
but only in such a way that the distance itselfbecomes one which has been
desevered*. So little has Dasein crossed over its de-severance that
it has rather taken it along with it and keeps doing so constantly; for
l ' ••. kann zwar se1bst von diesem aIs Abstand vorfindlich werden ....

I. 3
Being and Time
143
Dasein is essentially de-severance-that is, it is spatial. It cannot wander about
within the.current range ofits de-severances; it can never do more than
change them. Dasein is spatial in that it discovers space circumspectively,
so that indeed it constantly comports itself de-severantly* towards the
entities thus spatially encountered.
As de-severant Being-in, Dasein has likewise the character of directionality. Every bringing-close [Naherung] has already taken in advance a
direction towards a region outofwhich what is de-severed brings itself close
[sich nahert], so that one can come acrossitwithregard toitsplace'-Circumspective concern is de-severing which gives directionality. In this concern
-that is, in the Being-in-the-world of Dasein itself-a supply of 'signs' is
presented. Signs, as equipment, take over the giving of directions in a way
which is explicit and easily manipulable. They keep explicitly open those
regions which have been used circumspectively-the particular "whithers"
to which something belongs or goes, or gets brought or fetched. If Dasein
is, it already has, as directing and desevering, its own discovered region.
Both directionality and de-severance, as modes of Being-in-the-world,
are guided beforehand by the circumspection of concern.
Out of this directionality arise the fixed directions of right and left.
Dasein constantly takes these directions along with it, just as it does its
de-severances. Dasein's spatialization in its 'bodily nature' is likewise
marked out in accordance with these directions. (This 'bodily nature'
hides a whole problematic of its own, though we shall not treat it here.)
Thus things which are ready-to-hand and used for the body-like gloves,
for example, which are to move with the hands-must be given directionality towards right and left. A craftsman's tools, however, which are held
in the hand and are moved with it, do not share the hand's specifically
'manual' ["handliche"] movements. So although hammers are handled
just as much with the hand as gloves are, there are no right- or lefthanded hammers.
One must notice, however, that the directionality which belongs to
de-severance is founded upon Being-in-the-world. Left and right are not
something 'subjective' for which the subject has a feeling; they are directions of one's directedness into a world that is ready-to-hand already. 'By
the mere feeling of a difference between my two sides'xxi l could never
find my way about in a world. The subject with a 'mere feeling' of this
difference is a construct posited in disregard of the state that is truly
constitutive for any subject-namely, that whenever Dasein has such a
'mere feeling', it is in a world already and must be in it to be able to orient
itself at aIl. This becomes plain from the example with which Kant tries
to clarify the phenomenon oforientation.

109

Being and Time
I. 3
Suppose 1 step into a room which is familial' to me but dark, and which
has been rearranged [umgeraumt] during my absence so that everything
which used to be at my right is now at my left. If 1 am to orient myself
the 'mere feeling of the difference' between my two sides will be of no
help at aIl as long as 1 fail to apprehend sorne definite object 'whose
position', as Kant remarks casuaIly, '1 have in mind'. But what does this
signify except that whenever this happens 1 necessarily orient myselfboth
in and from my being already alongside a world which is 'familiar'?l The
equipment-context of a world must have been presented to Dasein. That
1 am already in a world is no less constitutive for the possibility of orientation than is the feeling for right and left. While this state of Dasein's
Being is an obvious one, we are not thereby justified in suppressing the
ontologically constitutive role which it plays. Even Kant does not suppress
it, any more than any other Interpretation of Dasein. Yet the fact that
this is a state of which we constantly make use, does not exempt us from
providing a suitable ontological explication, but rather demands one.
The psychological Interpretation according to which the "1" has something 'in the memory' ["im Gedachtnis"] is at bottom a way of alluding to
the existentially constitutive stateofBeing-in-the-world. Since Kant fails to
see this structure, he also fails to recognize aIl the interconnections which
the Constitution of any possible orientation implies. Directedness with
regard to right and left is based upon the essential directionality ofDasein
in general, and this directionality in turn is essentially co-determined by
Being-in-the-world. Even Kant, of course, has not taken orientation as a
theme for Interpretation. He merely wants to show that every orientation
requires a 'subjective principle'. Here 'subjective' is meant to signify
that this principle is apriori. 2 Nevertheless, the apriori character ofdirectedness with regard to right and 'left is based upon the 'subjective' a priori of
Being-in-the-world, which has nothing to do with any determinate
character restricted beforehand to a worldless subject.
De-severance and directionality, as constitutive characteristics ofBeingin, are determinative for Dasein's spatiality-for its being concernfully
and circumspective1y in space, in a space discovered and within-the-world.
Gnly the explication we have just given for the spatiality of the ready-tohand within-the-world and the spatiality of Being-in-the-world, will
provide the prerequisites for working out the phenomenon of the world's
spatiality and formulating the ontological problem of space.
144

1 10

l '. • . in und aus einemje schon sein bei einer "bekannten" Welt.' The earlier editions
have 'Sein' for 'sein'.
2 Here we folIow the later editions in reading '... bedeuten wolIen: a priori.' The
earIier editions omit the colon, making the passage ambiguous.

1. 3

Being and Time
145
~ 24. Space and Dasein's Spatiality
As Being-in-the-world, Dasein has already discovered a 'world' at any
time. This discovery, which is founded upon the worldhood of the world,
is one which we have characterized as freeing entities for a totality of
involvements. Freeing something and letting it be involved, is accomplished by way of referring or assigning onese1f circumspective1y, and this
in turn is based upon one's previously understanding significance. We
have now shown that circumspective Being-in-the-world is spatial. And
only because Dasein is spatial in the way of de-severanc~and directionality
can what is ready-to-hand within-the-world be encountered in its spatiality. To free a totality of involvements is, equiprimordiaIly, to let something be involved at a region, and to do so by de-severing and giving
directionality; this amounts to freeing the spatial be1onging-somewhere of
the ready-to-hand. In that significance with which Dasein (as concernful
Being-in) is familiar, lies the essential co-disclosedness of space. 1
The space which is thus disclosed with the worldhood of the world still
lacks the pure multiplicity of the three dimensions. In this disclosedness
which is closest to us, space, as the pure "wherein" in which positions are
ordered by measurement and the situations of things are determined, still
remains hidden. In the phenomenon of the region we have already indicated that on the basis ofwhich space is discovered beforehand in Dasein.
By a 'region" we have understood the "whither" to which an equipmentcontext ready-to-hand might possibly be1ong, when that context is of
such a sort that it can be encountered as directionally desevered-that
is, as having been placed. 2 This belongingness [Gehôrigkeit] is determined
in terms of the significance which is constitutive for the world, and it
Articulates the "hither" and "thither" within the possible "whither". In
general the "whither" gets prescribed by a referential totality which has
been made fast in a "for-the-sake-of-which" of concern, and within which
letting something be involved by freeing it, assigns itself. With anything
encountered as ready-to-hand there is always an involvement in [bei] a
region. To the totality of involvements which makes up the Being of the
ready-to-hand within-the-world, there belongs a spatial involvcment
which has the character of a region. By reason of such an involvement,
the ready-to-hand becomes something which we can come across and
ascertain as having form and direction. 3 With the factical Being of
l ' ••• die wesenhafte Miterschlossenheit des Raumes.'
2 'Wir verstehen sie ais das Wohin der moglichen Zugehorigkeit

des zuhandenen
Zeugzusammenhanges, der ais ausgerichtet entfernter, d. h. platzierter solI begegnen
kOnnen.'
3 'Auf deren Gronde wird das Zuhandene nach Form und Richtung vorfindlich und
bestimmbar'. The earIiest editions have 'erfindlich', which has been corrected to 'vorfindlich' in a list of errata.

III

146

1 12

Being and Time
I. 3
Dasein, what is ready-to-hand within-the-world is desevered* and given
directionality, depending upon the degree of transparency that is possible
for concernful circumspection.
When we let entities within-the-world be encountered in the way which
is constitutive for Being-in-the-world, we Ogive them space'. This 'giving
space', which we also caIl 'making room' for them, l consists in freeing
the ready-to-hand for its spatiality. As a way of discovering ~md presenting
a possible totality of spaces determined by involvements, this makingroom is what makes possible one's factical orientation at the time. In
concerning itself circumspectively with the world, Dasein can move
things around or out of the way or 'make room' for them [um-, weg-,
und "einraumen"] ooly because making-room-understood as an existentiale-belongs to its Being-in-the-world. But neither the region previously discovered nor in general the current spatiality is explicitly in
view. In itse1fit is present [zugegen] for circumspection in the inconspicuousness of those ready-to-hand things in which that circumspection is
concernfuIly absorbed. With Being-in-the-world, space is proximaIly
discovered in this spatiality. On the basis of the spatiality thus discovered,
space itse1f becomes accessible for cognition.
Space is not in the subject, nor is the world in space. Space is rather 'in' the
world in so far as space has been disclosed by that Being-in-the-world
which is constitutive for Dasein. Space is not to be found in the subject,
nor does the subject observe the world 'as if' that world were in a spacej
but the 'subject' (Dasein), ifweIl understood ontologicaIly, is spatial. And
because Dasein is spatial in the way we have described, space shows itself
as a priori. This term does not mean anything like previously belonging
to a subject which is proximaIly still worldless and which emits a space
out of itse1f. Here "apriority" means the previousness with which space
has been encountered (as a region) whenever the ready-to-hand is encountered environmentally.
The spatiality of what we proximaIly encounter in circumspection caÎl
become a theme for circumspection itself, as weIl as a task for calculation
and measurement, as in building and surveying. Such thematization of
the spatiality of the environment is still predominantly an act of circumspection by which space in itselfalready cornes into view in a certain way.
The space which thus shows itself can be studied pure1y by looking at it,
if one gives up what was formerly the only possibility of access to itcircumspective calculation. When space is 'intuited formaIly', the pure
1 Both 'Raum-geben' (our 'giving space') and 'Einraumen' (our 'making room') are
often used in the metaphorical sense of 'yielding', 'granting', or 'making concessions'.
'Einr~umen' may also be used for 'arranging' furniture, 'moving it in', or 'stowing it
away.

I. 3
Being and Time
147
possibilities of spatial relations are discovered. Here one may go through
a series of stages in laying bare pure homogeneous space, passing from the
pure morphology of spatial shapes to analysis situs and finaIly to the
purely metrical science ofspace. In our present study we shaIl not consider
how aIl these are interconnected. xxlI Our problematic is merely designed
to establish ontologicaIly the phenomenal basis upon which one can
take the discovery of pure space as a theme for investigation, and work
it out.
When space is discovered non-circumspectively by just looking at it,
the environmental regions get neutralized to pure dimensions. Placesand indeed the whole circumspectively oriented totality of places belonging to equipment ready-to-hand-get reduced to a multiplicity of positions for random Things. The spatiality ofwhat is ready-to-hand withinthe-world loses its involvement-character, and so does the ready-to-hand.
The world loses its specific aroundness j the environment becomes the
world of Nature. The 'world', as a totality of equipment ready-to-hand,
becomes spatialized [verraumlicht] to a context ofextended Things which
are just present-at-hand and no more. The homogeneous space of Nature
shows itself ooly when the entities we encounter are discovered in such
a way that the worldly character of the ready-to-hand gets specificaIly

deprived of its worldhood. 1
In accordance with its Being-in-the-world, Dasein always has space
presented as already discovered, though not thematicaIly. On the other
hand, space in itself, so far as it embraces the mere possibilities of the pure
spatial Being ofsomething, remains proximaIly still concealed. The fact that
space essentiaIly shows itself in a world is not yet decisive for the kind of Being
which it possesses. It need not have thekindofBeingcharacteristicofsomething which is itself spatiaIly ready-to-hand or present-at-hand. Nor does
the Being ofspace have the kind ofBeingwhich belongs to Dasein. Though
the Being of space itself cannot be conceived as the kind of Being which
belongs to ares extensa, it does not foIlow that it must be defincd onto10gicaIly as a 'phenomenon' of such a res. (In its Being, it would not be
distinguished from such ares.) Nor does it foIlow that the Being of space
can be equated to that of the res cogitans and conceived as merely 'subjective', quite apart from the questionable character of the Being of such a
subject.
The Interpretation of the Being of space has hitherto been a matter of
perplexity, not so much because we have been insufficiently acquainted
with the content of space itself as a thing [des Sachgehaltes des Raumes
l '. . . die den Charakter einer spezifischen Entweltlichung der Weltmassigkeit des
Zuhandenen hat.'

113

148

Being and Time

selbst], as because the possibilities of Being in general have not been in
principle transparent, and an Interpretation of them in terms of ontological concepts has been lacking. If we are to understand the ontological
problem of space, it is of decisive importance that the question of Being
must be liberated from the narrowness of those concepts of Being which
merely chance to be available and which are for the most part rather
rough; and the problematic of the Being of space (with regard to that
phenomenon itself and various phenomenal spatialities) must be turned
in such a direction as to clarify the possibilities of Being in general.
In the phenomenon of space the primary ontological character of the
Being of entities within-the-world is not to be found, either as unique or
as one among others. Still less does space constitute the phenomenon of
the world. Unless we go back to the world, space cannot be conceived.
Space becomes accessible only if the environment is deprived of its worldhood; and spatiality is not discoverable at all except on the basis of the
world. Indeed space is still one of the things that is constitutive for the
world, just as Dasein's own spatiality is essential to its basic state of Beingin-the-world. 1
1', , ,50 zwar, dass der Raum die Welt doch mitkonstituiert, entsprechend der wesen~
haften Riiumlichkeit des Daseins selbst hinsichtlich seiner Grundverfassung des In-derWe1t-seins,'

IV
BEING-IN-THE-WüRLD AS BEING-WITH AND
BEING-ONE'S-SELF. THE "THEY"
OUR analysis of the worldhood of the world has constantly been bringing
the whole phenomenon of Being-in-the-world into view, although its
constitutive items have not all stood out with the same phenomenal distinctness as the phenomenon of the world itself. We have Interpreted the
world ontologically by going through what is ready-to-hand within-theworld; and this Interpretation has been put first, because Dasein, in its
everydayness (with regard to which Dasein remains a constant theme for
study), not only is in a world but comports itselftowards that world with
one predominant kind ofBeing. Proximally and for the most part Dasein
is fascinated with its world. Dasein is thus absorbed in the world; the kind
ofBeing which it thus possesses, and in general the Being-in which underlies it, are essential in determining the character of a phenomenon which
we ~e now about to study. We shall approach this phenomenon by asking
whO it is that Dasein is in its everydayness.All the structures ofBeing which
belong to Dasein, together with the phenomenon which provides the
answer to this question of the "who", are ways ofits Being. To characterize
these ontologically is to do so existentially. We must therefore pose the
question correctly and outline the procedure for bringing into view a
broader phenomenal domain of Dasein's everydayness. By directing our
researches towards the phenomenon which is to provide us with an answer
to the question ofthe "who", we shall be led to certain structures ofDasein
which are equiprimordial with Being-in-the-world: Being-with and Daseinwith [Mitsein und Mitdasein]. In this kind of Being is grounded the mode
ofeveryday Being-one's-Self [Selbstsein]; the explication of this mode will
l 'Das Man'. In German one may write 'man glaubt' where in French one would
write 'on croit', or in English 'they believe', 'one believes', or 'it is believed', But the
German 'man' and the French 'on' are specialized for. such co~structio~ in ~ .way ~n
which the pronouns 'they', 'one', and 'it' are not. There IS accordmgly no smgle Id;ïomatlc
translation for the German 'man' which will not sometimes lend itselfto ambigmty, and
in general we have chosen whichever construction seems the most appropriate in its
context. But when Heidegger introduces this word with a definite article and writes 'das
Man', as he does very often in this chapter, we shall translate this expression as 'the
"they" " trusting that the reader will not take this too literally.

1 14

Being and Time
I. 4
enable us to see whatwe maycall the 'subject' ofeverydayness-the "they".
Our chapter on the 'who' of the average Dasein will thus be divided up
as follows: 1. an approach to the existential question of the "who" of
Dasein (Section 25); 2. the Dasein-withof Others, and everyday Being-with
(Section 26); 3. everyday Being-one's-Self and the "they" (Section 27).
~ 25. An Approach to the Existential Question of the "Who" of Dasein
The answer to the question of who Dasein is, is one that was seemingly
given in Section 9, where we indicated formally the basic characteristics
of Dasein. Dasein is an entity which is in each case 1 myself; its Being is
in each case mine. This definition indicates an ontologically constitutive state,
but it does no more than indicate it. At the same time this tells us ontically
(though in a rough and ready fashion) that in each case an ''l''-not
Others-is this entity. The question of the "who" answers itself in terms
of the "1" itself, the 'subject', the 'Self'.l The "who" is what maintains
itself as something identical throughout changes in its Experiences and
ways of behaviour, and which relates itself to this changing multiplicity
in so doing. Ontologically we understand it as something which is in
each case already constantly present-at-hand, both in and for a closed
realm, and which lies at the basis, in a very special sense, as the subjectum.
As something selfsame in manifold otherness, 2 it has the character of the
Self. Even if one rejects the "soul substance" and the Thinghood of consciousness, or denies that a person is an object, ontologically one is still
positing something whose Being retains the meaning of present-at-hand,
whether it does so explicitly or not. Substantiality is the ontological clue
for determining which entity is to provide the answer to the question of
the "who". Dasein is tacitly conceived in advance as something presentat-hand. This meaning of Being is always implicated in any case where
the Being of Dasein has been left indefinite. Yet presence-at-hand is the
kind of Being which belongs to entities whose character is notthat of Dasein.
The assertion that it is 1 who in each case Dasein is, is ontically obvious;
but this must not mislead us into supposing that the route for an ontological Interpretation of what is 'given' in this way has thus been unmistakably prescribed. Indeed it remains questionable whether even the mere
ontical content of the above assertion does proper justice to the stock of
phenomena belonging to everyday Dasein. It could be that the "who" of
everyday Dasein just is not the "1 myself".
150

1 15

l 'dem "Selbst" '. While we shaH ordinarily translate the intensive 'selbst' by the corresponding English intensives 'itself', 'oneself', 'myself', etc., according to the context, we
shaH translate the substantive 'Selbst' by the substantive 'Self' with a capital.
2 ' ••• ais Sel biges in der vielfiiItigen Andersheit .. .' While the words 'identisch' and
's~l~ig' .are virtually synonyms in ordinary- German, Heidegger seems to be intimating a
dlstmctlOn between them. We shaH accordmgly translate the former by 'identical' and the
latter by 'selfsame' to show its etymological connection with 'selbst'. Cf. H. 130 below.

Being and TiTTll
15 1
If, in arnvmg at ontico-ontological assertions, one is to exhibit the
phenomena in terms of the kind of Being which the entities themselves
possesses, and if this way of exhibiting them is to retain its priority over
even the most usual and obvious of answers and over whatever ways of
formulating problems may have been derived from those answers, then
the phenomenological Interpretation of Dasein must be defended against
a perversion of our problematic when we come to the question we are
about to formulate.
But is it not contrary to the rules of all sound method to approach a
problematic without sticking to what is given as evident in the area of
our theme? And what is more indubitable than the givenness of the ''l''?
And does not this givenness tell us that ifwe aim to work this out primordially, we must disregard everything else that is 'given'-not only a
'world' that is [einer seienden "Welt"], but even the Being ofother 'l's?
The kind of "giving" we have here is the mere, formaI, reffective
awareness of the "1"; and perhaps what it gives is indeed evident. l This
insight even affords access to a phenomenological problematic in its own
right, which has in principle the signification of providing a framework
as a 'formaI phenomenology ofconsciousness'.
ln this context of an existential analytic of factical Dasein, the question
arises whether giving the "1" in the way we have mentioned discloses
Dasein in its everydayness, if it discloses Dasein at all. Is it then obvious
a priori that access to Dasein must be gained only by mere reffective
awareness of the "1" of actions? What if this kind of 'giving-itself' on
the part of Dasein should lead our existential analytic astray and do so,
indeed, in a manner grounded in the Being ofDasein itself? Perhaps when
Dasein addresses itself in the way which is closest to itself, it always says
"1 am this entity", and in the long run says this loudest when it is 'not'
this entity. Dasein is in each case mine, and this is its constitution; but
what if this should be the very reason why, proximally and for the most
part, Dasein is not itself? What if the aforementioned approach, starting
with the givenness of the "1" to Dasein itself, and with a rather patent selfinterpretation of Dasein, should lead the existential analytic, as it were,
into a pitfall? If that which is accessible by mere "giving" can be determined, there is presumably an ontological horizon for determining it;
but what ifthis horizon should remain in principle undetermined? It may
well be that it is always ontically correct to say ofthis entity that '1' am it.
Yet the ontological analytic which makes use ofsuch assertions must make
certain reservations about them in principle. The word '1' is to be
I. 4

l 'Vielleicht ist in der Tat das, was diese Art von Gebung, das schlichte, formale,
reflektive Ichvemehmen gibt, evident.'

1 16

152

117

Being and Time

I. 4

understood only in the sense of a non-committalformal indicator, indicating
something which may perhaps reveal itself as its 'opposite' in sorne particulaI' phenomenal context ofBeing. In that case, the 'not-l' is by no means
tantamount to an entity which essentially lacks 'I-hood' ["Ichheit"],
but is rather a definite kind of Being which the '1' itself possesses, such as
having lost itself [Selbstverlorenheit].
Yet even the positive Interpretation of Dasein which we have so far
given, already forbids us to start with the formaI givenness of the "1", if our
purpose is to answer the question of the "who" in a way which is phenomenally adequate. In c1arifying Being-in-the-world we have shown that
a bare subject without a world never 'is' proximally, nor is it ever given.
And so in the end an isolated "1" without Others is just as far from being
proximally given. i If, however, 'the Others' already are there with us [mit
dasind) in Being-in-the-world,and ifthis is ascertained phenomenally,even
this should not mislead us into supposing that the ontological structure of
what is thus 'given' is obvious, requiring no investigation. Our task is to
make visible phenomenally the species to which this Dasein-with in closest
everydayness belongs, and to Interpret it in a way which is ontologically
appropriate.
Just as the ontical obviousness of the Being-in-itself of entities withinthe-world misleads us into the conviction that the meaning of this Being
is obvious ontologically, and makes us overlook the phenomenon of the
world, the ontical obviousness of the fact that Dasein is in each case mine,
also hides the possibility that the ontological problematic which belongs
to it has been led astray. Proximally the "who" of Dasein is not only a
problem ontologically; even ontically it remains concealed.
But does this mean that there are no clues whatever for answering the
question of the "who" by way of existcntial analysis? Certainly not. Of
the ways in which we formally indicated the constitution of Dasein's Being
in Sections 9 and 12 above, the one we have been discussing does not, of
course, function so weIl as such a clue as does the one according to which
Dasein's 'Essence' is grounded in its existence. l If the ']' is an Essential
characteristic of Dasein, then il is one which must be Interpreted existentially. In
that case the "Who?" is to be answered only by exhibiting phenomenally
a definite kind of Being which Dasein possesses. If in each case Dasein is
its Self only in exislùzg, then the constancy of the Self no less than the
l'as sucll a clue': here we read 'aIs solcher', following the later editions. The earliest
editions have 'aIs solche', which has bcen correctcd in the list of errata.
"Essence": while we ordinarily use 'essence' and 'essential' to translate 'Wesen' and
'wesenhaft', we shall use 'Essence' and "Essential' (with initial capitals) to translate the
presumably synonymous but far less frequcnt 'Essenz' and 'essentiell'.
The two 'formaI indications' to which Heidegger refers are to be found on H. 42 above.

I. 4
Being and Time
153
possibility of its 'failure to stand by itself'l requires that we formulate the
question existentially and ontologically as the sole appropriate way of
access to its problematic.
But if the Self is conceived 'only' as a way of Being of this entity, this
seems tantamount to volatilizing the real 'core' of Dasein. Any apprehensiveness however whieh one may have about this gets its nourishment from
the perverse assumption that the entity in question has at bottom the kind
of Being which belongs to something present-at-hand, even if one is far
from attributing to it the solidity of an occurrent corporeal Thing. Yet
man's 'substance' is not spirit as a synthesis of soul and body; it is rather
existence.
~ 26. The Dasein-with of Others and Everyday Being-with

The answer to the question of the "who" of everyday Dasein is to be
obtained by analysing that kind of Being in which Dasein maintains
itself proximally and for the most part. Our investigation takes its orientation from Being-in-the-world-that basic state of Dasein by which every
mode of its Being gets co-determined. If we are correct in saying that by
the foregoing explication of the world, the remaining structural items of
Being-in-the-world have become visible, then this must also have prepared
us, in a way, for answering the question of the "who".
In our 'description' of that environment which is closest to us-the
work-world of the craftsman, for example,-the outcome was that along
with the equipment to be found when one is at work [in Arbeit), those
Others for whom the 'work' ["Werk") is destined are 'encountered too'. 2
If this is ready-to-hand, then there lies in the kind of Being which
belongs to it (thatis, in its involvement) an essential assignment or reference
to possible wearers, for instance, for whom it should be 'eut to the figure'.
Similarly, when material is put to use, we encounter its producer or
'supplier' as one who 'serves' weIl or badly. When, for example, we walk
along the edge of a field but 'outside il', the field shows itself as belonging
to such-and-such a person, and decently kept up by him; the book we
have used was bought at So-and-so's shop and given by such-and-such
l ' ... die Standigkeit des Selbst ebensosehr wie seine mogliche "Unselbstandigkeit" .. .'
The adjective 'standig', which we have usually translated as 'constant' in the sense of
'permanent' or 'continuing', goes back to the raot meaning of 'standing', as do the
adjectives 'selbstandig' ('independent') and 'unselbstândig' ('dependent'). These concepts will be discussed more fully in Section 64 below, especially H. 322, where 'Unselbstandigkeit' will be rewritten not as 'Un-selbstandkeit' ('failure to stand by one's Self')
but as 'Unse1bst-standigkeit' ('constancy to the Unself'). See also H. 128. (The connection
with the concept of existence will perhaps be c1earer if one recalls that the Latin verb
'existere' may also be derived from a verb of standing, as Heidegger points out in his later
writings.)
2 Cf. Section 15 above, especially H. 70f.

118

154
Being and Time
I. 4
a persan, and so forth. The boat anchored at the shore is assigned in its
Being-in-itself to an acquaintance who undertakes voyages with it; but
even if it is a 'boat which is strange to us', it still is indicative of Others.
The Others who are thus 'encountered' in a ready-to-hand, environmental context of equipment, are not somehow added on in thought to
some Thing which is proximally just present-at-hand; such 'Things' are
encountered from out of the world in which they are ready-to-hand for
Others-a world which is always mine too in advance. In our previous
analysis, the range of what is encountered within-the-world was, in the
first instance, narrowed down to equipment ready-to-hand or Nature
present-at-hand, and thus to entities with a character other than that of
Dasein. This restriction was necessary not only for the purpose of simplifying our explication but above aIl because the kind of Beingwhich belongs
to the Dasein of Others, as we encounter it within-the-world, differs from
readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand. Thus Dasein's world frees
entities which not only are quite distinct from equipment and Things, but
which also-in accordance with their kind ofBeing as Dasein themselvesare 'in' the world in which they are at the same time encountered withinthe-world, and are 'in' it by way of Being-in-the-world. 1 These entities
a:e neither present-at-hand nor ready-to-hand; on the contrary, they are
Me the very Dasein which frees them, in that they are there tao, and there
with it. So if one should want to identify the world in general with
entities within-the-world, one would have to say that Dasein too is
'world'.2
Thus in characterizing the encountering of Others, one is again still
oriented by that Dasein which is in each case one's own. But even in this
characterization does one not start by marking out and isolating the '1'
so that one must then seek some way of getting over to the Others from
this isolated subject? To avoid this misunderstanding we must notice in
what sense we are talking about 'the Others'. By 'Others' we do not mean
everyone else but me-those over against whom the "1" stands out. They
are rather those from whom, for the most part, one does not distinguish
o~eself:-those among whom one is too. This Being-there-too [Auch-dasem] wlth them does not have the ontological character of a Being-presentat-hand-along-'with' them within a world. This 'with' is something of the
char~cter of Dasein; the 'too' means a sameness of Being as circumspectIvely concernfJ.Ù Being-in-the-world. 'With' and 'too' are to be
.1 '. ,;.' ,~ondern ge~a4 seiner Seinsart als Dasein selbst in der Weise des In-der-WeIt-

sel~~

~n der.WeIt ~st, 10 der es zugleich innerweItlich begegnet.'
Dleses ~elende Ist w~der vorhanden noch zuhanden, sondern ist so, wie das freigebendc; Dasem s~lbst~ ISt au~h
m!t da. Wollte man denn schon WeIt überhaupt mit
dem .mnerweIthch Selenden Identlfizleren, dann müsste man sagen "Welt" ist auch
Dasem.'
'

un4

1. 4
Being and Time
155
understood existentially, not categoriaIly. By reason of this with-like [mithaften]
Being-in-the-world, the world is always the one that 1 share with Others.
The world of Dasein is a with-world [Mitwelt]. Being-in is Being-with
Others. Their Being-in-themselves within-the-world is Dasein-with [Mitdasein].
When Others are encountered, it is not the case that one's own subject IIg
is proximally present-at-hand and that the rest of the subjects, which are
likewise occurrents, get discriminated beforehand and then apprehended;
nor are they encountered by a primary act of looking at oneself in such
a way that the opposite pole of a distinctionfirst gets ascertained. They
are encountered from out of the world, in which concernfully circumspective Dasein essentially dwells. TheoreticaIly concocted 'explanations' of
the Being-present-at-hand of Others urge themselves upon us aIl too
easily; but over against such explanations we must hold fast to the phenomenal facts of the case which we have pointed out, namely, that Others
are encountered environmentally. This elemental worldly kind of encountcring, which belongs to Dasein and is closest to it, goes so far that even one's
own Dasein becomes something that it can itself proximaIly 'come across'
only when it looks away from 'Experiences' and the 'centre of its actions',
or does not as yet 'see' them at aIl. Dasein finds 'itself' proximaIly in
what it does, uses, expects, avoids-in those things environmentaIlY readyto-hand with which it is proximaIly concerned.
And even when Dasein explicitly addrcsses itsclf as "1 here", this
locative personal designation must be understood in terms of Dasein's
existential spatiality. In Interpreting this (See Section 23) we have
already intimated that this "I-herc" does not mean a certain privileged
point-that of an I-Thing-but is to be understood as Being-in in terms
of the "yonder" of the world that is ready-to-hand-the "yonder" which
is the dwelling-placc of Dasein as concern. 1
W. von Humboldt ll has alludcd to certain languages which express the
'1' by 'here', the 'thou' by 'there', the 'he' by 'yonder', thus rendering the
personal pronouns by locative adverbs, to put it grammaticaIly. It is controversial whethcr indeed the primordial signification of locative expressions is adverbial or pronominal. But this dispute loses its basis if one
notes that locative adverbs have a rclationship to the "1" qua Dasein. The
'here' and the 'there' and the 'yonder' are primarily not mere ways of
designating the location of entities present-at-hand within-the-world at
positions in space; they are rather characteristics of Dasein's primordial
l ' ••• dass dieses Ich-hier nicht einen ausgezeichneten Punkt des Ichdinges meint,
sondern sich versteht aIs In-sein aus dem Dort der zuhandenen WeIt, bei dem Dasein
aIs Besorgen sich aufhalt.' The older editions have 'In-Sein' for 'In-sein', and 'dabei' for
'bei dem',

120

156
Being and Time
I. 4
spatiality. These supposedly locative adverbs are Dasein-designations;
they have a signification which is primarily existential, not categorial.
But theyare not pronouns either; their signification is prior to the differentiation of locative adverbs and personal pronouns: these expressions
have a Dasein-signification which is authentically spatial, and which
serves as evidence that when we interpret Dasein without any theoretical
distortions we can see it immediately as 'Being-alongside' the world with
which it concerns itself, and as Beipg-alongside it spatially-that is to say,
as desevering* and giving directionality. In the 'here', the Dasein which is
absorbed in its world speaks not towards itselfbut away from itselftowards
the 'yonder' of something circumspectively ready-to-hand; yet it still has
itseif in view in its existential spatiality.
Dasein understands itself proximally and for the most part in terms of
its world; and the Dasein-with of Others is often encountered in terms of
what is ready-to-hand within-the-world. But even if Others become
themes for study, as it were, in their own Dasein, they are not encountered
as person-Things present-at-hand: we meet them 'at work', that is, primarily in their Being-in-the-world. Even ifwe see the Other 'just standing
around', he is never apprehended as a human-Thing present-at-hand, but
his 'standing-around' is an existential mode of Being-an unconcerned,
uncircumspective tarrying alongside everything and nothing [Verweilen
bei Allem und Keinem]. The Other is encountered in his Dasein-with
in the world.
The expression 'Dasein', however, shows plainly that 'in the first
instance' this entity is unrelated to Others, and that of course it can still
be 'with' Others afterwards. Yet one must not fail to notice that we
use the term "Dasein-with" to designate that Being for which the
Others who are [die seienden Anderen] are freed within-the-world. This
Dasein-with of die Others is disdosed within-the-world for a Dasein, and
so too for those who are Daseins with us [die Mitdaseienden], only because
Dasein in itself is essentially Being-with. The phenomenological assertion
that ~'Dasein is essentially Being-with" has an existential-ontological
meamng. It does not seek to establish ontically that factically 1 am not
present-at-hand alone, and that Others of my kind occur. If this were
what is meant by the proposition that Dasein's Being-in-the-world is
essentially constituted by Being-with, then Being-with would not be an
existential attribute which Dasein, of its own accord, has coming to it
~rom its own kind ofBeing. It wotild rather be something which turns up
ln every case by reason of the occurrence of Others. Being-with is an
existential characteristic of Dasein even when factically no Other is
present-at-hand or perceived. Even Dasein's Being-alone is Being-with

J. 4
Being and Time
157
1
1
in the world. The Other can be missing only in and for a Being-with.
Being-alone is a deficient mode of Being-with; its very possibility is the
proof of this. On the other hand, factical Being-alone is not obviated by
the occurrence of a second example of a human being 'beside' me, or by ten
such examples. Even if these and more are present-at-hand, Dasein can
still be alone. 80 Being-with and the facticity of Being with one another
are not based on the occurrence together of several 'subjects'. Yet Beingalone 'among' many does not mean that with regard to their Being they
are merely present-at-hand there alongside us. Even in our Being 'among
them' they are there with us; their Dasein-with is encountered in a mode
in which they are indifferent and alien. Being missing and 'Being away'
[Das Fehlen und "Fortsein"] are modes of Dasein-with, and are possible
only because Dasein as Being-with lets the Dasein of Others be encountered in its world. Being-with is in evcry case a characteristic of one's
own Dasein; Dasein-with characterizes the Dasein ofOthers to the extent
that it is freed by its world for a Bcing-with. Only so far as one's own
Dasein has the essential structure of Being-with, is it Dasein-with as
encounterable for Others. 2
If Dasein-with remains existentially constitutive for Being-in-theworld, then, like our circumspective dealings with the ready-to-hand
within-the-world (which, by way of anticipation, we have called 'concern'), it must be Interpreted in terms of the phenomenon of care; for as
"care" the Being ofDasein in general is to be defined. 3 (Compare Chapter
6 of this Division.) Concern is a character-of-Being which Being-with
cannot have as its own, even though Being-with, like concern, is a Being
towarris entities encountered within-the-world. But those entities towards
which Dasein as Being-with comports itself do not have the kind ofBeing
which belongs to equipment ready-to-hand; they are themselves Dasein.
These entities are not objects of concern, but rather of solicitude. 4
1 Italics supplied in the later editions.
2 ' • • • Mitdasein charakterisiert das Dasein anderer, sofern es für ein Mitsein durch

dessen Welt freigegeben ist. Das eigene Dasein ist, sofern es die Wesensstruktur des
Mitseins hat, ais für Andere begegnend Mitdasein.'
3 ' ••• ais welche das Sein des Daseins überhaupt bestimmt wird.' The older editions
omit 'wird'.
4 'Dieses Seiende wird nicht besorgt, sondern steht in der Fürsorge.' There is no good
English equivalent for 'Fürsorge', which we shaH usuaHy translate by 'solicitude'. The more
literai 'caring-for' has the connotation of 'being fond of', which we do not want here;
'personal care' suggests personal hygiene; 'personal concern' suggests one's persona!
business or affairs. 'Fürsorge' is rather the kind of care which we find in 'prenatal care' or
'taking care of the children', or even the kind of care which is administered by welfare
agencies. Indeed the word 'Fürsorge' is regularly used in contexts where we would speak
of 'welfare work' or 'social welfare; this is the usage which Heidegger has in mind in his
discussion of 'Fürsorge' as 'a factical social arrangement'. (The etymological connection
between 'Sorge ('care'), 'Fürsorge' ('solicitude'), and 'Besorgen ('concern'), is entirely
lost in our translation.)

121

15 8

122

Being and Time
I. 4
Even 'concern' with food and c1othing, and the nursing of the sick body,
are forms of solicitude. But we understand the expression "solicitude" in
a way which corresponds to our use of "concern". as a term for an existentiale. For example, 'welfare work' ["Fürsorge"], as a factical social
arrangement, is grounded in Dasein's state of Being as Being-with. Its
factical urgency gets its motivation in that Dasein maintains itself proximaIly and for the most part in the deficient modes ofsolicitude. Being for,
against, or without one another, passing one another by, not "mattering"
to one anothcr-these are possible ways of solicitude. And it is precisely
these last-named deficient and Indifferent modes that characterize
everyday, average Being-with-one-another. These modes of Being show
again the characteristics of inconspicuousness and obviousness which
belong just as much to the everyday Dasein-with of Others within-theworld as to the readiness-to-hand of the equipment with which one is
daily concerned. These Indifferent modes of Being-with-one-another may
easily mislead ontological Interpretation into interpreting this kind of
Being, in the first instance, as the mere Being-present-at-hand of several
subjects. It seems as ifonly negligible variations of the same kind ofBeing
lie before us; yet ontologically there is an essential distinction between
the 'indiffcrent' way in which Things at random occur together and the
way in which entities who are with one another do not "matter" to one
another.
With regard to its positive modes, solicitude has two extreme possibilities. It can, as it were, take away 'care' from the Other and put itself
in his position in concern: it can leap in for him. t This kind of solicitude
takes over for the Other that with which he is to concern himself. The
Other is thus thrown out of his own position; he steps back so that afterwards, when the matter has been attended to, he can either take it over as
something finished and at his disposal, 2 or disburden himself of it completely. In such solicitude the Other can become one who is dominated
and dependent, even if this domination is a tacit one and remains hidden
from him. This kind ofsolicitude, which leaps in and takes away 'care', is
to a large extent determinative for Being with one another, and pertains
for the most part to our concern with the ready-to-hand.
In contrast to this, there is also the possibility of a kind of solicitude
which does not so much leap in for the Other as leap ahead of him [ihm
t '... si.ch an seine Stelle se~~n, fü~ ihn einspringen.' Here, as on H. 100 (See our note 2,
p. 1~3): ~t wou~d be ~ore IdlOmatlc to translate 'für ihn einspringen' as 'intervene
for hlm, stand ln for hlm' or 'serve as deputy for him'· but since 'einspringcn' is to be
contr~ted with 'vorspringen', 'vorausspringcn' and pe~haps even 'entspringen' in the
followln~ paragraphs, we have chosen a translation which suggests the etymological
connectlon.
2 ' ••• um nachtraglich das Besorgte ais fertig Verfügbares zu übernehmen •. .'

I. 4
Being and Time
159
vorausspringt] in his existentiell potentiality-for-Being, not in order to take
away his 'care' but rather to give it back to him authentically as such for
the first time. This kind of solicitude pertains essentially to authentic care
-that is, to the existence of the Other, not to a "what" with which he is
concerned; it helps the Other to become transparent to himselfin his care
and to becomefreefor it.
Solicitude proves to be a state of Dasein's Being--one which, in
accordance with its different possibilities, is bound up with its Being
towards the world of its concern, and likewise with its authentic Being
towards itself. Being with one another is based proximally and often
exc1usively upon what is a matter of common concern in such Being.
A Being-with-one-another which arises [entspringt] from one's doing the
same thing as someone else, not only keeps for the most part within the
outer limits, but enters the mode of distance and reserve. The Beingwith-one-another of those who are hired for the same affair often thrives
only on mistrust. On the other hand, when they devote themselves to the
same affair in common, their doing so is determined by the manner in
which their Dasein, each in its own way, has been taken hold of.! They
thus become authentically bound together, and this makes possible the right
kind of objectivity [die rechte Sachlichkeit], which frees the Other in his
freedom for himself.
Everyday Being-with-one-another maintains itself between the two
extremes of positive solicitude-that which leaps in and dominates, and
that which leaps forth and liberates [vorspringend-befreienden]. It brings
numerous mixed forms to maturity;2 to describe these and c1assify them
would take us beyond the limits ofthis investigation.
Just as circumspection belongs to concern as a way of discovering what is
ready-to-hand, solicitude is guided by considerateness and forbearance. 3
Like solicitude, these can range through their respective deficient and
Indifferent modes up to the point of inconsiderateness or the perfunctoriness
for which indifference leads the way.4
l 'Umgekehrt ist das gemeinsame Sicheinsetzen für dieselbe Sache aus dem je eigens
ergriffenen Dasein bestimmt.'
2 Reading'... und zcitigt mannigfache Mischformen .. .' with the older editions. The
later editions have 'zeigt' ('shows') instead of'zeitigt' ('brings to maturity'). On 'zeitigen'
see H. 304 and our note ad loc.
a 'Wie dem Besorgen ais Weise des Entdeckens des Zuhandencn die Umsicht zugehort,
so ist die Fürsorg: g ~Ieitet durch die Rücksicht und Nachsicht.' Heidegger is here calling
attention to the etymological kinship of the three words which he italicizes, each ofwhich
slands for a special kind of sight or seeing ('Sicht').
The ita!icization of 'Umsicht' ('circumspection') is introduced in the newer editions.
4 ' • • • bis zur Rücksichtslosigkeit und dem Nachsehen, das die Gleichgültigkeit
leitet.' This passage is ambiguous both syntactically and semantically. It is not clear, for
instance, whether the subject of the relative clause is 'die Gleichgültigkeit' or the pronoun
'das', though we prefer the former interpretation. 'Nachsehen', which is etymologicaily

123

160

Being and Time

I. 4

The world not only frees the reaùy-to-hand as enhtles encountered
within-the-world; it also frees Dasein, and the Others in their Daseinwith. But Dasein's ownmost meaning of Being is such that this entity
(which has been freed environmentally) is Being-in in the same world in
which, as encounterable for Others, it is there with them. We have
interpreted worldhood as that referential totality which constitutes
significance (Section lB). In Being-familiar with this significance and
previously understanding it, Dasein lets what is ready-to-hand be encountered as discovered in its involvement. InDasein'sBeing, the context of
references or assignmentswhich significance implies is tied upwithDasein's
ownmost Being-a Being which essentially can have no involvement,
but which is rather that Being for the sake of which Dasein itself is as
it is.
According to the analysis which we have now completed, Being with
Others belongs to the Being of Dasein, which is an issue for Dasein in its
very Being. l Thus as Being-with, Dasein 'is' essentially for the sake of
Others. This must be understood as an existential statement as to its
essence. Even if the particular factical Dasein does not turn to Others, and
supposes that it has no need of thcm or manages to get along without
them, it is in the way ofBeing-with. In Being-with, as the existential "forthe-sake-of" of Others, these have already been disclosed in their Dasein.
With their Being-with, their disclosedness has been constituted beforehand; accordingly, this disclosedness also goes to make up significancethat is to say, worldhood. And, significance, as worldhood, is tied up with
the existential "for-the-sake-of-which". 2 Since the worldhood of that world
in which every Dasein essentially is already, is thus constituted, it accordingly lets us encounter what is environmentally ready-to-hand as something with which we are circumspectively concerned, and it does so in
such a way that together with it we encounter the Dasein-with of Others.
The structure of the world's worldhood is such that Others are not
proximally present~at-hand as free-floating subjects along with other
Things, but show themselves in the world in their special environmental
Being, and do so in terms ofwhat is ready-to-hand in that world.
Being-with is such that the disclosedness of the Dasein-with of Others
~kin to 'Nachsicht', means to 'inspect' or 'check' something; but it often means to do this

in a .veryyerfunctory manner, and this latter sense may weIl be the one which Heidegger
has in mind.
l '. . • zu~ Sein de~ Daseins, um das es ihm in seinem Sein selbst geht . • .'
The older edltlOns have darum' instead of'um das'.
2 'Diese mit dein Mitsein vorgangig konstituierte Erschlossenheit der Anderen macht
demnach auch die Bedeutsamkeit, d.h. die WcItIichkeit mit aus ais welche sie im
e~s~enzialen Worum-willen festgemacht ist.' The word 'sie' appea'rs only in the later
edltlOns.

I. 4
Being and Time
161
belongs to it; this means that because Dasein's Being is Being-with, its
understanding of Being already implies the understanding of Others.
This understanding, like any understanding, is not an acquaintance
derived from knowledge about them, but a primordially existential kind
of Being, which, more than anything else, makes such knowledge and
acquaintance possible. l Knowing oneself [Sichkennen] is grounded in
Being-with, which understands primordially. It operates proximally in
accordance with the kind of Being which is closest to us-Being-in-theworld as Being-with; and it does so by an acquaintance with that which
Dasein, along with the Others, cornes across in its environmental circumspection and concerns itself with-an acquaintance in which Dasein
understands. Solicitous concern is understood in terms of what we are
concerned with, and along with our understanding of it. Thus in concernful solicitude the Other is proximally disclosed.
But because solicitude dwells proximally and for the most part in the
deficient or at least the Indifferent modes (in the indifference of passing
one another by), the kind of knowing-oneself which is essential and
c1osest, demands that one become acquainted with oneself. 2 And when,
indeed, one's knowing-oneself gets lost in such ways as aloofness, hiding
oneself away, or putting on a disguise, Being-with-one-another must
follow special routes of its own in order to come close to Others, or even
to 'see through them' ["hinter sie" zu kommen].
But just as opening oneself up [Sichoffenbaren] or c10sing oneself off is
grounded in one's having Being-with-one-another as one's kind of Being
at the time, and indeed is nothing else but this, even the explicit disc10sure of the Other in solicitude grows only out of one's primarily Being
with him in each case. Such a disc10sure of the Other (which is indeed
thematic, but not in the manner oftheoretical psychology) easily becomes
the phenomenon which proximally cornes to view when one considers the
theoretical problematic of understanding the 'psychical life of Others'
["fremden Seelenlebens"]. In this phenomenally 'proximal' manner it
thus presents a way of Being with one another understandingly; but at
the same time it gets taken as that which, primordially and 'in the
beginning', constitutes Being towards Others and makes it possible at aIl.
l 'Dieses Verstehen ist, wie Verstehen überhaupt, nicht eine aus Erkennen erwachsene
Kenntnis, sondern eine ursprünglich existenziaie Seinsart die Erkennen und Kenntnis
aIlererst moglich macht'. While we have here translated 'Kenntnis' as 'acquaintance' and
'Erkennen' as 'knowledge about', these terms must not be understood in the special
senses exploited by Lord Russell and C. I. Lewis. The 'acquaintance' here involved is of
the kind which may be acquired whenever one is weIl informed about something. whether
one has any direct contact with it or not.
.
2 '. • • bedarf das nachste und wesenhafte Sichkennen eines Sichkennenlernens.'
'Sichkennen' ('knowing oneself') is to be distinguished sharply from 'Selbsterkenntnis'
('knowledge of the Self'), which will be discussed on H. 146. See our note l, p. 186.

12 4

Being and Time
I. 4
This phenomenon, which is none too happily designated as 'empathy'
["EinJühlung"] , is then supposed, as it were, to provide the fust ontological bridge from one's own subject, which is given proximally as alone,
to the other subject, which is proximally quite closed off.
Of course Being towards Others is ontologically different from Being
towards Things which are present-at-hand. The entity which is 'other'
has itself the same kind of Being as Dasein. In Being with and towards
Others, there is thus a relationship ofBeing [Seinsverhaltnis] from Dasein
to Dasein. But it might be said that this relationship is already constitutive
for one's own Dasein, which, in its own right, has an understanding of
Being, and which thus relates itselfl towards Dasein. The relationship-ofBeing which one has towards Others would then become a Projection 2
of one's own Being-towards-oneself 'into something else'. The Other
would be a duplicate of the Self.
But while these deliberations seem obvious enough, it is easy to see that
they have littIe ground to stand on. The presupposition which this argument demands-that Dasein's Being towards an Other is its Being towards
itself-fails to hold. As long as the legitimacy of this presupposition has not
turned out to be evident, one may still be puzzled as to how Dasein's
relationship to itselfis thus to be disclosed to the Other as Other.
Not only is Being towards Others an autonomous, irreducible relationship ofBeing: this relationship, as Being-with, is one which, with Dasein's
Being, already is. 3 Of course it is indisputable that a lively mutual
acquaintanceship on the basis of Being-with, often depends upon how far
one's own Dasein has understood itself at the time; but this means that it
depends only upon how far one's essential Being with Others has made
itself transparent and has not disguised itself. 4 And that is possible only if
Dasein, as Being-in-the-world, already is with Others. 'Empathy' does not
fust constitute Being-with; only on the basis of Being-with does 'empathy'
become possible: it gets its motivation from the unsociability of the
dominant modes of Being-with. 5
162

12 5

l '. . . sich ... verhiilt .. .' We have often translated this expression as 'comports'
itself', compromising between two other possible meanings: 'relates itself' and 'behaves
or 'conducts itself'. In this passage, however, and in many others where this expression is
tied up with 'Verhiiltnis' ('relationship') rather than with 'Verhalten' ('behaviour or
'conduct'), only 'relates itself' seems appropriate.
:1 'Projektion'. Here we are dealing with 'projection' in the familiar psychological sense,
not in the sense which would be expressed by 'Entwurf'. See H. 145 ff.
3 'Das Sein zu Anderen ist nicht nur ein eigenstiindiger, irreduktibler Seinsbezug, er
ist aIs Mitsein mit dem Sein des Daseins schon seiend.'
4. ' • • • wie weit es das wesenhafte Mitsein mit anderen sich durchsichtig gemacht
und nicht verstellt hat .. .' (The older editions have'.•. sich nicht undurchsichtig
gemacht und verstellt hat .. .'.)
6 '''Einfühlung'' konstituiert nicht erst das Mitsein, sondem ist auf dessen Grunde
erst môglich und durch die vorherrschenden defizienten Modi des Mitseins in ihrer
Unumgiinglichkeit motiviert.'

J. 4

Being and Time
163
But the fact that 'empathy' is not a primordial existential phenomenon,
any more than is knowing in general, does not mean that there is nothing
problematical about it. The special hermeneutic of empathy will have to
show how Being-with-one-another and Dasein's knowing of itself are led
astrayand obstructed by the various possibilities of Being which Dasein itself
possesses, so that a genuine 'understanding' gets suppressed, and Dasein
takes refuge in substitutes; the possibility of understanding the stranger
correctIy presupposes such a hermeneutic as its positive existential
condition. l Our analysis has shown that Being-with is an existential constituent of Being-in-the-world. Dasein-with has proved to be a kind of
Being which entities encountered within-the-world have as their
own. So far as Dasein is at aU, it has Being-with-one-another as its kind
of Being. This cannot be conceived as a summative result of the occurrence of several 'subjects'. Even to come across a number of 'subjects'
[einer Anzahl von "Subjekten"] becomes possible only if the Others who
are concerned proximally in their Dasein-with are treated merely as
'numerals' ["Nummer"]. Such a number of'subjects' gets discovered only
by a definite Being-with-and-towards-one-another. This 'inconsiderate'
Being-with 'reckons' ["rechnet"] with the Others without seriously
'counting on them' ["auf sie ziihlt"], or without even wanting to 'have
anything to do' with them.
One's own Dasein, like the Dasein-with of Others, is encountered
proximally and for the most part in terms of thewith-world with which we
are environmentaUy concerned. When Dasein is absorbed in the world
of its concern-that is, at the same time, in its Being-with towards Others
-it is not itself. Who is it, then, who has taken over Being as everyday
Being-with-one-another?
~ 27. Everyday Being-one's-Seifand the "They"

The ontologically relevant result of our analysis of Being-with is the
insight that the 'subject character' of one's own Dasein and that of Others
is to be defined existentially-that is, in terms of certain ways in which
one may be. In that with which we concern ourselves environmentally
the Others are encountered as what they are; they are what they do [sie
sind das, was sie betreiben].
In one's concern with what one has taken hold of, whether with, for,
or against, the Others, there is constant care as to the way one differs
from them, whether that difference is merely one that is to be evened out,
whether one's own Dasein has lagged behind the Others and wants to
~ ' •.• welche positive existenziale Bedingung rechtes Fremdverstehen für seine Môglichkelt voraussetzt.' We have construed 'welche' as referring back to 'Hermeneutik', though
this is not entirely clear.

126

12

7

164
Being and Time
1. 4
catch up in relationship to thern, or whether one's Dasein already has
sorne priority over them and sets out to keep them suppressed. The care
about this distance between them is disturbing to Being-with-one-another,
though this disturbance is one that is hidden from it. If we may express
this existentiaIly, such Being-with-one-another has the character of
distantiality [Abstt.ïndigkeit]. The more inconspicuous this kind of Being is
to everyday Dasein itself, aIl the more stubbornly and primordially does
it work itself out.
But this distantiality which belongs to Being-with, is such that Dasein,
as everyday Being-with-one-another, stands in subjeetion [Botmt.ïssigkeit] to
Others. It itself is not;l its Being has been taken away by the Others.
Dasein's everyday possibilities of Being are for the Others to dispose of
as they please. These Others, moreover, are not dejinite Others. On the
contrary, any Other can represent them. What is decisive is just that
inconspicuous domination by Others which has already been taken over
unawares fromDasein as Being-with. One belongs to the Others oneselfand
enhances their power. 'The Others' whom one thus designates in order to
coyer up the fact of one's belonging to them essentially oneself, are those
who proximally and for the most part 'are tFrere' in everyday Being-withone-another. The "who" is not this one, not that one, not oneself [man
selbst], not sorne people [einige], and not the sum ofthem aIl. The 'who'
is the neuter, the "they" [das Man].
We have shown earlier how in the environment which lies closest to us,
the public 'environment' already is ready-to-hand and is also a matter
of concem [mitbesorgt]. In utilizing public means of transport and
in making use of information services such as the newspaper, every Other
is like the next. This Being-with-one-another dissolves one's own Dasein
completely into the kind of B6ing of 'the Others', in such a way, indeed,
that the Others, as distinguishable and explicit, vanish more and more. In this
inconspicuousnessand unascertainability, the real dictatorship ofthe "they"
is unfolded. We take pleasure and enjoy ourselves as they [man] take
pleasure; we read, see, and judge about literature and art as they see and
judge; likewise we shrink back from the 'great mass' as they shrink back;
we find 'shocking' what they find shocking. The "they", which is nothing
definite, and which aIl are, though not as the sum, prescribes the kind of
Being of everydayness.
The "they" has its own ways in which to be. That tendency of Beingwith which we have called "distantiality" is grounded in the fact that
Being-with-one-another concems itself as such with averageness, which is
an existential characteristic of the "they". The "they", in its Being,
l

'Nicht es selbst ist; •. .'

I. 4
Being and Time
165
essentially makes an issue of this. Thus the "they" rnaintains itself factically in the averageness of that which belongs to it, of that which it regards
as valid and that which it does not, and of that to which it grants success
and that to which it denies it. In this averageness with which it prescribes
what can and may be ventured, it keeps watch over everything exceptional
that thrusts itself to the fore. Every kind of priority gets noiselessly suppressed. Ovemight, everything that is primordial gets glossed over as
something that has long been weIl known. Everything gained by a struggle
becomes just something to be manipulated. Every secret loses its force.
This care of averageness reveals in tum an essential tendency of Dasein
which we calI the "levelling down" [Einebnung] ofall possibilities ofBeing.
Distantiality, averageness, and levelling down, as ways of Being for the
"they", constitute what we know as 'publicness' ["die Offentlichkeit"].
Publicness proximally controls every way in which the world and Dasein
get interpreted, and it is always right-not because there is sorne distinctive and primary relationship-of-Being in which it is related to 'Things',
or because it avails itself ofsorne transparency on the part of Dasein which
it has explicitly appropriated, but because it is insensitive to every difference of level and of genuineness and thus never gets to the 'heart of the
matter' ["auf die Sachen"]. By publicness everything gets obscured, and
what has thus been covereà up gets passed off as something familiar and
accessible to everyone.
The "they" is there alongside everywhere [ist überall dabei], but in
such a manner that it has always stolen away whenever Dasein presses
for a decision. Yet because the "they" presents every judgment and decision as its own, it deprives the particular Dasein of its answerability. The
"they" can, as it were, manage to have 'them' constantly invoking it. l
It can be answerable for everything most easily, because it is not someone
who needs to vouch for anything. It 'was' a1ways the "they" who did it,
and yet it can be said that it has been 'no one'. In Dasein's everydayness
the agency through which most things come about is one of which we
must say that "it was no one".
Thus the particular Dasein in its everydayness is disburdened by the
"they". Not only that; by thus disburdeningit of its Being, the "they"
accommodates Dasein [kommt . . . dem Dasein entgegen] if Dasein
has any tendency to take things easily and make them easy. And because the "they" constantly accommodates the particular Dasein by disburdening it of its Being, the "they" retains and enhances its stubbom
dominion.
Everyone is the other, and no one is himself. The "they", which supplies
l

'Das Man kaon es sich gIeichsam Ieisten, dass "man" sich stiindig auf es beruft.'

128

166

Being and Time

1.4

the answer to the question of the "who" of everyday Dasein, is the
"nobody" to whom every Dasein has already surrendered itself in Being-

129

among-one-other [Untereinandersein].
In these characters ofBeing which we have exhibited---everyday Beingamong-one-another, distantiality, averageness, levelling down, publicness, the disburdening of one's Being, and accommodation-lies that
'constancy' of Dasein which is closestto us. This "constancy" pertains not
to the enduring Being-present-at-handofsomething, but rather to Dasein's
kind of Being as Being-with. Neither the Self of one's own Dasein nor the
Selfof the Other has as yet found itselfor lost itself as long as it is [seiend]
in the modes we have mentioned. In these modes one's way of Being is
that of inauthenticity and failure to stand by one's Self. l To be in this
way signifies no lessening of Dasein's facticity, just as the "they", as the
"nobody", is by no means nothing at all. On the contrary, in this kind
of Being, Dasein is an ms realissimum, if by 'Reality' we understand a
Being with the character ofDasein.
Of course, the "they" is as little present-at-hand as Dasein itself. The
more openly the "they" behaves, the harder it is to grasp, and the slier it
is, but the less is it nothing at aU. If we 'see' it ontico-ontologically with
an unprejudiced eye, it reveals itself as the 'Realest subject' of everydayness. And even if it is not accessible like a stone that is present-at-hand,
this is not in the least decisive as to its kind of Being. One may neither
decree prematurely that this "they" is 'really' nothing, nor profess the
opinion that one can Interpret this phenomenon ontologically by sornehow 'explaining' it as what results from taking the Being-present-at-handtogether ofseveral subjects and then fitting them together. On the contrary,
in working out concepts of Being one must direct one's course by these
phenomena, which cannot be pushed aside.
Furthermore, the "they" is not something like a 'universal subject' which
a plurality of subjects have hovering above them. One can come to take
it this way only if the Being of such 'subjects' is understood as having a
character other than that of Dasein, and if these are regarded as cases of
a genus of occurrents-eases which are factually present-at-hand. With
this approach, the only possibility ontologically is that everything which is
not a case of this sort is to be understood in the sense of genus and species.
The "they" is not the genus to which the individual Dasein belongs, nor
can we come across it in such entities as an abiding characteristic. That
even the traditionallogic fails us when confronted with these phenomena,
is not surprising if we bear in mind that it has its foundation in an
l'Man ist in der Weise der Unselbstandigkdt und Uneigentlichkeit.' On 'Standigkeit'
and 'Unselbstandigkeit' see our note 1, p. 153, H. 117 above.

I. 4

Being and Time

167

ontology of the present-at-hand-an ontology which, moreover, is still a
rough one. So no matter in how many ways this logic may be improved
and expanded, it cannot in principle be made any more flexible. Such
reforms oflogic, oriented towards the 'humane sciences', only increase the
ontological confusion.
The "they" is an existentiale; and as a primordial phenomenon, it belongs to
Dasein's positive constitution. It itself has, in turn, various possibilities of

becoming concrete as something characteristic of Dasein [seiner daseinsmassigen Konkretion]. The extent to which its dominion becomes compelling and explicit may change in the course of history.
The Self of everyday Dasein is the they-self, 1 which we distinguish from
the authentie Seif-that is, from the Self which has been taken hold of in
its own way [eigens ergriffenen]. As they-self, the particular Dasein has
been. dispersed into the "they", and must first find itself. This dispersal
characterizes the 'subject' of that kind of Being which we know as concernful absorption in the world we encounter as closest to us. If Dasein
is familiar with itself as they-self, this means at the same time that the
"they" itself prescribes that way of interpreting the world and Being-inthe-world which lies closest. Dasein is for the sake of the "they" in an
everyday manner, and the "they" itself Articulates the referential context
ofsignificance. 2 When entities are encountered, Dasein's world frees them for
a totalityofinvolvements with which the "they" is familiar, and within the
limits which have been established with the "they's" averageness. Proxïmally, factical Dasein is in thewith-world, which is discovered in an average
way. Proximally, it is not 'l', in the sense of my own Self, that 'am', but
rather the Others, whoseway is that of the "they". 3 ln terms of the "they",
and as the "they", 1 am 'given' proximally to 'myself' [mir "selbst"].
Proximally Dasein is "they", and for the most part it remains so. If
Dasein discovers the world in its own way [eigens] and brings it close, ifit
discloses to itselfits own authentic Being, then this discovery of the 'world'
and this disclosure of Dasein are always accomplished as a clearingaway of concealments and obscurities, as a breaking up of the disguises
with which Dasein bars its own way.
With this Interpretation of Being-with and Being-one's-Self in the
l '••. das Man-selbst .• .' This expression is also to be distinguished from 'das Man
selbst' ('the "they" itself'), which appears elsewhere in this paragraph. In the first ofthese
ex~ressions 'selbst' appears as a substantive, in the second as a mere intensive.
'Das Man selbst, worum-willen das Dasein alltaglich ist, artikuliert den Verweisungszusammenhang der Bedeutsamkeit.' It is also possible to construe 'alltaglich' as a predicate adjective after 'ist'; in that case we should read: 'Dasein is everyday for the sake
of the "they".'
3 'Zuniichst "bin" nicht "ich" im Sinne des eigenen Selbst, sondern die Anderen in der
Weise des Man.' In the earlier editions there are commas after ' "ich" , and 'Anderen',
which would suggest a somewhat different interpretation.

130

168
Being and Time
I. 4
"they", the question of the "who" of the everydayness of Being-with-oneanother is answered. These considerations have at the same time brought
us a concrete understanding of the basic constitution of Dasein: Being-inthe-world, in its everydayness and its averageness, has become visible.
From the kind of Being which belongs to the "they"-the kind which
is closest-everyday Dasein draws its pre-ontological way of interpreting
its Being. In the first instance ontological Interpretation follows the
tendency to interpret it this way: it understands Dasein in terms of the
world and cornes across it as an entity within-the-world. But that is not aIl:
even that meaning of Being on the basis of which these 'subject' entities
[diese seienden "Subjekte"] get understood, is one which that ontology
of Dasein which is 'closest' to us lets itself present in terms of the 'world'.
But because the phenomenon of the world itself gets passed over in this
absorption in the world, its place gets taken [tritt an seine SteIle] by what
is present-at-hand within-the-world, namely, Things. The Being of those
entities which are there with us, gets conceived as presence-at-hand. Thus
by exhibiting the positive phenomenon of the closest everyday Being-inthe-world, we have made it possible to get an insight into the reason why
an ontological Interpretation of this state of Beh,lg has been missing. This.
very stale of Being,l in its everyday kind of Being, is what proximally misses itself
and covers itself up.
If the Being of everyday Being-with-one-another is already different
in principle from pure presence-at-hand-in spite of the fact that it is
seemingly close to it ontologicaIly-stiIlless can the Being of the authentic
Self be conceived as presence-Ilt-hand. Authentic Being-one's-Self does not
rest upon an exceptional condition of the subject, a condition that has
been detached from the "they"; it is rather an existentiel! modification of the
"they"- of the "they" as an essential existentiale.
But in that case there is ontologically a gap separating the selfsameness
of the authentically existing Self from the identity of that "1" which
maintains itself throughout its manifold Experiences.
1 We interpret Heidegger's pronoun 'Sie' as referring to 'Seinsverfassung' ('state of
Being'); but there are other words in the previous sentence to which it might refer with
just as much grammatical plausibility, particularly 'Interpretation'.

v
BEING-IN AS SU CH

11 28. The Task ofa Thematic Analysis of Being-in
1 N the preparatory stage of the existential analytic of Dasein, we have for
our leading theme this entity's basic state, Being-in-the-World. Our first
aim is to bring into reliefphenomenally the unitary primordial structure of
Dasein's Being, in terms ofwhich its possibilities and the ways for it 'to be,
are ontologically determined. Up till now, our phenomenal characterization
ofBeing-in-the-world has been directed towards the world, as a structural
item ofBeing-in-the-world, and has attempted to provide an answer to the
question about the "who" of this entity in its everydayness. But even in
first marking out the tasks of a preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein,
we have already provided an advance orientation as to Being-in as such,i
and have illustrated it in the concrete mode ofknowing the world. u
The fact that we foresaw this structural item which carries so much
weight, arose from our aim ofsetting the analysis ofsingle items, from the outset, within the frame of a steady preliminary view of the structural whole,
and of guarding against any disruption or fragmentation of the unitary
phenomenon. Now,keeping in mind what has beenachievedin theconcrete
analysis of the world and the "who", we must turn our Interpretation
back to the phenomenon of Being-in. By considering this more penetratingly, however, we shall not only get a newand surer phenomenological
view of the structural totality of Being-in-the-world, but shall also pave
the way to grasping the primordial Being of Dasein itself-namely, care.
But what more is there to point out in Being-in-the-world, beyond the
essential relations of Being alongside the world (concem), Being-with
(solicitude), and Being-one's-Self ("who")? Ifneed be, there still remains
the possibility of broadening out the analysis by characterizing comparatively the variations of concem and its circumspection, of solicitude
and the considerateness which goes with it; there is also the possibility of
contrasting Dasein with entities whose character is not that of Dasein by
a more precise explication of the Being of aIl possible entities within-the-

131

Being and Time
I. 5
world. Without question, there are unfinished tasks stilllying in this field.
What we have hitherto set forth needs to be rounded out in many ways
by working out fully the existential a priori of philosophical anthropology
and taking a look at it. But this is not the aim of our investigation. Its
aim is one Offundamental ontology. Consequently, ifwe inquire about Being-in
as our theme, we cannot indeed consent to nullify the primordial character
of this phenomenon by deriving it from others-that is to say, by an
inappropriate analysis, in the sense of a dissolving or breaking up. But
the fact that something primordial is underivable does not rule out the
possibility that a multiplicity of characteristics of Being may be constitutive for it. If these show themselves, then existentially they are
equiprimordial. The phenomenon of the equiprimordiality of constitutive
items has often been disregarded in ontology, because of a methodologically unrestrained tendency to derive everything and anything from sorne
simple 'primaI ground'.
In which direction must we look, if we are to characterize Being-in,
assuch, phenomenally? We get the answer to this question by recalling
what we were charged with keeping phenomenologically in view when we
called attention to this phenomenon: Being-in is distinct from the present- .
at-hand insideness of something present-at-hand 'in' something else that
is present-at-hand; Being-in is not a characteristic that is effected, or even
just elicited, in a present-at-hand subject by the 'world's' Being-presentat-hand; Being-in is rather an essential kind of Being of this entity itself.
But in that case, what else is presented with this phenomenon than the
commercium which is present-at-hand between a subject present-at-hand and
an Object present-at-hand? Such an interpretation would come closer
to the phenomenal content ifwe were to say that Dasein is the Being ofthis
'between'. Yet to take our orientation from this 'between' would still be
misleading. For with such an orientation we would also be covertly
assuming the entities between which this "between", as such, 'is', and we
would be doing so in a way which is ontologically vague. The "between"
is already conceived as the result of the convenientia of two things that are
present-at-hand. But to assume these beforehand always splits the phenomenon asunder, and there is no prospect of putting it together again from
the fragments. Not only do we lack the 'cement'; even the 'schema' in
accordance with which this joining-together is to be accomplished, has
been split asunder, or never as yet unveiled. What is decisive for ontology
is to prevent the splitting of the phenomenon-in other words, to hold its
positive phenomenal content secure. To say that for this we need farreaching and detailed study, is simply to express the fact that something
which was ontically self-evident in the traditional way of treating the
1 70

132

J.5
Being and Time
17 1
'problem ofknowledge' has often been ontologically disguised to the point
where it has been lost sight of altogether.
The entity which is essentially constituted by Being-in-the-world is
itself in every case its 'there'. According to the familiar signification of the
word, the 'there' points to a 'here' and a 'yonder'. There 'here' of an
'I-here' is always understood in relation to a 'yonder' ready-to-hand, in
the sense of a Being towards this 'yonder'-a Being which is de-severant,
directional, and concernful. Dasein's existential spatiality, which thus
determines its 'location', is itself grounded in Being-in-the-world. The
"yonder" belongs definitely to something encountered within-the-world.
'Here' and 'yonder' are possible only in a 'there'-that is to say, only if
there is an entity which has made a disclosure of spatiality as the Being of
the 'there'. This entity carnes in its ownmost Being the character of not
being closed off. In the expression 'there' we have in view this essential
disclosedness. By reason ofthis disclosedness, this entity (Dasein), together
with the Being-there 1 of the world, is 'there' for itself.
When we talk in an ontically figurative way of the lumen naturate in
man, we have in mind nothing other than the existential-ontological
structure ofthis entity, that it is in such a way as to be its "there". To say
that it is 'illuminated' ["erleuchtet"] means that as Being-in-the-world
it is cleared [gelichtet] in itself, not through any other entity, but in such
a way that it is itself the clearing. 2 Only for an entity which is existentially
cleared in this waydoes that which is present-at-hand become accessible in
the light or hidden in the dark. Byitsverynature, Dasein brings its "there"
along with it. If it lacks its "there", it is not factically the entity which is
essentially Dasein; indeed,it is not this entityat all. Dasein is ils disclosedness.
We are to set forth the Constitution of this Being. But in so far as the
essence of this entity is existence, the existential proposition, 'Dasein is its
disclosedness', means at the same time that the Being which is an issue for
this entity in its very Being is to be its 'there'. In addition to characterizing
the primary Constitution of the Being of disclosedness, we will require, in
conformity with the course of the analysis, an Interpretation of the kind
of Being in which this entity is its "there" in an everyday manner.
This chapter, in which we shall undertake the explication ofBeing-in as
such (that is to say, of the Being of the "there"), breaks up into two parts:
A. the existential Constitution of the "there" ; B. the everyday Being of the
"there", and the falling of Dasein.
In understanding and state-oJ-mind, we shall see the two constitutive ways
l'Da-sein'. See our note l, p. 27, H. 7 above.
.
.
:1 'Lichtung'. This word is customarily used to stand for a 'clearln~' ln the w?od~, not

for a 'clarification'; the verb 'Iichten' is similarly used. The force of thlS passage lIes ln the
fact that these words are cognates of the noun 'Licht' ('light').

133

134

172
Being and Time
1. 5
of being the "there"; and these are equiprimordial. If these are to be
analysed, sorne phenomenal confirmation is necessary; in both cases this
will be attained by Interpreting sorne concrete mode which is important
for the subsequent problematic. State-of-mind and understanding are
characterized equiprimordially by discourse.
Under A (theexistential Constitutuonofthe"there") weshallaccordingly
treat: Being-there as state-of-mind (Section 29); fear as a mode ofstate-ofmind (Section 30) ; Being-there as understanding (Section 3 1) ; understanding and interpretation (Section 32) ; assertion as a derivative mode of interpretation (Section 33); Being-there, discourse, and language (Section 34).
The analysis of the characteristics of the Being of Being-there is an
existential one. This means that the characteristics are not properties of
something present-at-hand, but essentially existential ways to be. We
must therefore set forth their kind of Being in everydayness.
Under B (the everyday Being ofthe "there", and the falling of Dasein) we
shall analyse idle talk (Section 35), curiosity (Section 36), and ambiguity
(Section 37) as existential modes of the everyday Being of the "there";
we shall analyse them as corresponding respectively to the constitutive
phenomenon of discourse, the sight which lies in understanding, and
the interpretation (or explaining [Deutung]) which belongs to understanding. In these phenomenal modes a basic kind of Being of the "there" will
become visible-a kind of Being which we Interpret as falling· and this
'falling' shows a movement [Bewegtheit] which is existentially i~s own. 1

A. The Existential Constitution of the "There"
~ 29. Being there as State-of-mind

What we indicate ontologically by the term "state-of-mind"2 is ontically
the most familiar and everyday sort of thing; our mood, our Beingattuned. 3 Prior to all psychology of moods, a field which in any case still
1 While we shall ordinarily reserve the word 'falling' for 'Verfallen' (see our note 2
p. 42, H. 21 above), in this sentence it represents first 'Verfallen' and then 'Fallen' th~
usual German word for 'falling'. 'Fallen' and 'Verfallen' are by no means strictly syn'onymo~; the lat~er general~y has the. further conn?ta~on of'decay' or 'deterioration', though
Heldc;gger will ~ak~ pams to p.omt out that m hlS own usage it 'does not express any
ne~atIve evaluatIon. See SectIon 38 below.
'Befindlichk~it'. More literally: 'the state in which one may be found'. (The common
German. expressIOn 'Wie befinden Sie sich?' means simply 'How are you?' or 'How are
rou feelmg?') Our translation, 'state-of-mind', comes fairly close to what is meant; but
lt sh~uld be made clear that the 'of-mind' belongs to English idiom, has no literaI counterpart m. the structure of the German word, and fails to bring out the important connotation
of findmg oneself.
3.'... die S~~g, das Gestimm.tsein.' The noun 'Stimmung' originally means the
tuning of a musical Instrument, but lt has taken on several other meanings and is the
usual word for one's mood or humour. We shall usually translate it as 'mood' and we
shall generally transla~e both 'Gestimmtsein' and 'Gestimmtheit' as 'having ~ mood',
though sometImes, as m the present sentence, we prefer to calI attention to the root
metaphor of 'Gestimmtsein' by writing 'Being-attuned', etc.

I. 5
Being and Time
1 73
lies fallow, it is necessary to see this phenomenon as a fundamental
existentiale, and to outline its structure.
Both the undisturbed equanimity and the inhibited ill-humour of our
everyday concern, the way we slip over from one to the other, or slip off
into bad moods, are by no means nothing ontologically,l even if these
phenomena are left unheeded as supposedly the most indifferent and
fleeting in Dasein. The fact that moods can deteriorate [verdorben werden] and change over means simply that in every case Dasein always has
sorne mood [gestimmt ist]. The pallid, evenly balanced lack of mood
[Ungestimmtheit], which is often persistent and which is not to be
mistaken for a bad mood, is far from nothing at all. Rather, it is in this
that Dasein becomes satiated with itself. Being has become manifest as
a burden. Why that should be, one does not know. And Dasein cannot know
anything of the sort because the possibilities of disclosure which belong to
cognition reach far too short a way compared with the primordial
disclosure belonging to moods, in which Dasein is brought before its
Being as "there". Furthermore, a mood of elation can alleviate the
manifest burden of Being; that such a mood is possible also discloses the
burdensome character of Dasein, even while it alleviates the burden.
A mood makes manifest 'how one is, and how one is faring' ["wie
einem ist und wird"]. In this 'how one is', having a mood brings Being to
its "there".
In having a mood, Dasein is always disclosed moodwise as that entity
to which it has been delivered over in its Being; and in this way it has
been delivered over to the Being which, in existing, it has to be. "To be
disclosed" does not mean "to be known as this sort of thing". And even
in the most indifferent and inoffensive everydayness the Being of Dasein
can burst forth as a naked 'that it is and has to be' [ais nacktes "Dass' es
est ist und zu sein hat"]. The pure 'that it is' shows itself, but the "whence"
and the "whither" remain in darkness. The fact that it is just as everyday
a matter for Dasein not to 'give in' ["nachgibt"] to such moods-in
other words, not to follow up [nachgeht] their disclosure and allow itselfto
be brought before that which is disclosed-is no evidence against the
phenomenal facts of the case, in which the Being of the "there" is disclosed moodwise in its "that-it-is";2 it is rather evidence for it. In an
1 In this sentence 'equanimity' represents 'Gleichmut', 'ill-humour' represents 'Missmut', and 'bad moods' represents 'Verstimmungen'.
2 '. • • den phiinomenalen Tatbestand der stimmungsmiissigen Erschlossenheit des
Seins des Da in seinem Dass . . .' It would be more literaI to write simply 'in its
"that" '; but to avoid a very natural confusion between the conjunction 'that' and
pronoun 'that', we shall translate 'das Dass' as 'the "that-it-is" " even though we use
the same expression unhl.P.henated for 'das "Dass es ist'" in this paragraph and in that
which follows. (The striking contrast between the 'Da' and the 'Dass' is of course lost in
translation.)

135

174
Being and Time
I. 5
ontico-existentiell sense, Dasein for the most part evades the Being which
is disclosed in the mood. In an ontologico-existential sense, this means that
even in that to which such a mood pays no attention, Dasein is unveiled
in its Being-delivered-over to the "there". In the evasion itself the "there"
is something disclosed.
This characteristic of Dasein's Being-this 'that it is'-is veiled in its
"whence" and "whither", yet disclosed in itself aU the more unveiledly;
we caU it the "thrownness" 1 of this entity into its "there"; indeed, it is
thrown in such a way that, as Being-in-the-world, it is the "there". The
expression "thrownness" is meant to suggest the facticity of ils being
delivered over. 2 The 'that it is and has to be' which is disclosed in Dasein's
state-of-mind is not the same 'that-it-is' which expresses ontologicocategoriaUy the factuality belonging to presence-at-hand. This factuality
becomes accessible only if we ascertain it by looking at it. The "that-it-is"
which is disclosed in Dasein's state-of-mind must rather be conceived as
an existential attribute of the entity which has Being-in-the-world as its
way of Being. Facticity is not the factuality of the factum brutum of something present-at-hand, but a characteristic of Dasein's Being-one which has been
taken up into existence, even if proximally it kas been thrust aside. The "that-it-is"
of facticity never becomes something that we can come across by beholding it.
An entity of the character of Dasein is its "there" in such a way that,
whether explicitly or not, it finds itself [sich befindet] in its thrownness.
ln a state-of-mind Dasein is always brought before itself, and has
always found itself, not in the sense of coming across itself by perceiving
itself, but in the sense of finding itself in the mood that it has. 3 & an entity
which has been delivered over to its Being, it remains also delivered over
to the fact that it must always have found itself-but found itself in a
way of finding which arises not so much from a direct seeking as rather
from a fleeing. The way in which the mood discloses is not one in which
we look at thrownness, but one in which we turn towards or turn away
[An- und Abkehr]. For the most part the mood does not turn towards
the burdensome character of Dasein which is manifest in it, and least ofaU
does it do so in the mood of elation when this burden has been alleviated.
It is always by way of a state-of-mind that this turning-away is what it is.
l 'Gewo~fenheit'. This important term, which Heidegger introduces here is further
discussed in Section 38.
'
:& 'Der Ausdruck Geworfenheit soll die Faktizitiit der Oberantwortung andeutm.' On the
distinction between 'facticity' and 'factuality', see H. 56 above.
3 In ~is sentence ~e~e is a contrast ~etween '~ahrnehmendesSich-vorfinden' ('coming
acr0s:' Itsel[ by percelVrng') and 'gestlmmtes Slchbefinden' ('finding itself in the mood
that It has). In the next sentence, on the other hand, 'found' and 'finding' represent
'gefunden' and 'Finden'.

J. 5

Being and Time
175
PhenomenaUy, we would whoIly fail to recognize both what mood
discloses and how it discloses, if that which is disclosed were to be compared with what Dasein is acquainted with, knows, and belîeves 'at the
same time' when it has such a mood. Even if Dasein is 'assured' in its
belief about its 'whither', or if, in rational enlightenment, it supposes
itself to know about its "whence", aIl this counts for nothing as against
the phenomenal facts of the case: for the mood brings Dasein before the
"that-it-is" of its "there", which, as such, stares it in the face with the
inexorability ofan enigma. 1 From the existential-ontological point ofview,
there is not the slightest justification for minimizing what is 'evident' in
states-of-mind, by measuring it against the apodictic certainty of a theoretical cognition of something which is purely present-at-hand. However
the phenomena are no less falsified when they are banished to the sanctuary of the irrational. When irrationalism, as the counterplay of rationalism, talks about the things to which rationj'llîsm is blind, it does so only
with a squint.
FacticaUy, Dasein can, should, and must, through knowledge and will,
become master of its moods; in certain possible ways of existing, this may
signify a priority of volition and cognition. Dnly we must not be misled
by this into denying that ontologicaUy mood is a primordial kind ofBeing
for Dasein, in which Dasein is disclosed to itself prior to all cognition and
volition, and beyond their range of disclosure. And furthermore, when we
master a mood, we do so by way of a counter-mood; we are never free
ofmoods. DntologicaUy, we thus obtain as thefirst essential characteristic
- ofstates-of-mind that they disclose Dasein in its thrownness, and-proximally and
for the most part-in the manner of an evasive tuming-away.
From what has been said we can see already that a state-of-mind is
very remote from anything like coming aeross a psychical condition by
the kind of apprehending which first turns round and then back. Indeed
it is so far from this, that only because the "there" has already been disclosed inastate-of-mindcanimmanent reflection come across 'Experiences'
at aU. The 'bare mood' discloses the "there" more primordiaUy, but correspondingly it closes it offmore stubbornly than any not-perceiving.
This is shown by bad mooris. In these, Dasein becomes blind to itself,
the environment with which it is concerned veils itself, the circumspection
of concern gets led astray. States-of-mind are so far from being reflected
upon, that precisely what they do is to assail Dasein in its unreflecting
devotion to the 'world' with which it is concerned and on which it expends
l '. • . so verschliigt das alles nichts gegen den phiinomenalen :rat~estand, ~~ die
Stimmung das Dasein vor das Dass seines Da bringt, aIs welches es Ih~ rn ~erbltth~her
Riitselhaftigkeit entgegenstarrt.' The pronoun 'es' (the reference ofwhlCh 18 not entlrely
unambiguous) appears only in the later editions.

136

1 37

176
Being and Time
1. 5
itSelf. A mood assails us. It comes neither From 'outside' nor from 'inside',
but arises out of Being-in-the-world, as a way ofsuch Being. But with the
negative distinction between state-of-mind and the reflective apprehending of something 'within', we have thus reached a positive insight
into their character as disclosure. The mood has already disclosed, in every
case, Being-in-the-world as a whole, and makes it possible first of aU to direct oneselftowards something. Having a mood is not rèlated to the psychical in the
first instance, and is not itself an inper condition which then reaches Forth
in an enigmatical way and puts its mark on Things and persons. It is in
this that the second essential characteristic of states-of-mind shows itself.
We have seen that the world, Dasein-with, and existence are equiprimordialb' disclosed; and state-of-mind is a basic existential species of their disclosedness, because this disclosedness itselfis essentially Being-in-the-world. 1
Besides these two essential characteristics of states-of-mind which have
been explained-the disclosing of thrownness and the current disclosing
of Being-in-the-world as a whole-we have to notice a third, which contributes above aIl towards a more penetrating understanding of the worldhood of the world. As we have said earlier,Ul the world which has already
been disclosed beforehand permits what is within-the-world to be encountered. This prior disclosedness of the world belongs to Being-in and
is partIy constituted by one's state-of-mind. Letting something be encountered is primarily circumspective; it is not just sensing something, or
staring at it. It implies circumspective concern, and has the character of
becoming affected in some way [Betroffenwerdens]; we can see this more
precisely From the standpoint of state-of-mind. But to be affected by the
unserviceable, resistant, or threatening character [Bedrohlichkeit] of that
which is ready-to-hand, becomes ontologically possible only in so far as
Being-in as such has been determined existentially beforehand in such a
manner that what it encounters within-the-world can "matter" to it in
this way. The fact that this sort ofthing can "matter" to it is grounded in
one's state-of-mind; and as a state-of-mind it has already disclosed the
world-as something by which it can be threatened, for instance. 2 Only
something which is in the state-of-mind of fearing (or fearlessness) can
discover that what is environmentally ready-to-hand is threatening.
Dasein's openness to the world is constituted existentially by the attunement of a state-of-mind.
And only because the 'senses' [die "Sinne"] belong ontologically to an
1'• . . weil diese se1bst wesenhaft In-der-We1t-sein ist.' It is not clear whether the
antecedent of'diese' is 'Existenz' ('existence') or 'Erschlossenheit' ('disclosedness').
2 'Diese Angiinglichkeit gründet in der Befindlichkeit, aIs welche sie die We1t zum
Beispiel auf Bedrohbarkeit hin erschlossen bat.' The pronoun 'sie' appears only in the
newer editions.

J. 5

Being and Time

177

entity whose kind ofBeing is Being-in-the-world with a state-ofmind,l can
they be 'touched' by anything or 'have a sense for' ["Sinn haben für"]
something in such a way that what touches them shows itself in an affect. 2
Under the strongest pressure and resistance, nothing like an affect would
come about, and the resistance itself would remain essentially undiscovered, if Being-in-the-world, with its state-of-mind, had not already
submitted itself [sich schon angewiesen] to having entities within-theworld "matter" to it in a way which its moods have outlined in advance.
Existentialb', a state-of-mind implies a disclosive submission to the world, out of
which we can encounter something that matters to us. Indeed from the ontological
point of view we must as a general principle leave the primary discovery of
the world to 'bare mood'. Pure beholding, even if it were to penetrate to
the innermost core of the Being ofsomething present-at-hand, could never
discover anything like that which is threatening.
The fact that, even though states-of-mind are primarily disclosive, everyday circumspection goes wrong and to a large extent succumbs to delusion
because of them, is a p.~ av [non-being] when measured against the idea
ofknowing the 'world' absolutely. But ifwe make evaluations which are
so unjustified ontologically, we shall completely fail to recognize the
existentially positive character of the capacity for delusion. It is precisely
when wc see the 'world' unsteadily and fitfully in accordance with our
moods, that the ready-to-hand shows itselfin its specifie worldhood, which
is never the same From day to day. By looking at the world theoretically,
we have already dimmed it down to the uniformity of what is purely
present-at-hand, though admittedly this uniformity comprises a new
abundance of things which can be discovered by simply characterizing
them. Yet even the purest 8Ewpta [theory] has not left aIl moods behind
it; even when we look theoretically at what is just present-at-hand, it does
not show itself purely as it looks unless this 8Ewpta lets it come towards us
in a tranquil tarrying alongside ... , in paO'TwvTJ and S'aywy~.lV Any cognitive determining has its existential-ontological Constitution in the state-ofmind of Being-in-the-world; but pointing this out is not to be confused
with attempting to surrender science ontically to 'feeling'.
l 'befindlichen In-der-Welt-seins'. In previous chapters we have usually translated
'befindlich' by such expressions as 'which is to be found', etc. See, for instance, H. 67, 70
117 above, where this adjective is applied to a number of things which are hardly of th~
character of Dasein. In the present chapter, however, the word is tied up with the special
sense of 'Befindlichkeit' as 'state-of-mind', and will be translated by expressions such as
'with a state-of-mind', 'having a state-of-mind', etc.
2 In this sentence Heidegger has been calling attention to two ways of using the word
'Sinn' which might weil be expressed by the word 'sense' but hardly by the word 'meaning': (1) 'die Sinne' as 'the five senses' or the 'senses' one has when one is 'in one's senses';
(2) 'der Sinn' as the 'sense' one has 'for' something--one's 'sense for clothes', one's 'sense
of beauty', one's 'sense of the numinous', etc. Cf. the discussion of'Sinn' on H. 151 f. below.

13 8

139

178
Being and Time
I. 5
The different modes of state-of-mind and the ways in which they are
interconnected in their foundations cannot be Interpreted within the
problematic of the present investigation. The phenomena have long been
well-known ontically under the terms "affects" and "feelings" and have
always been under consideration in philosophy. It is not an accident that
the earliest systematic Interpretation of affects that has come down to us
is not treated in the framework of 'psychology'. Aristotle investigates the
7flî67J [affects] in the second book of his RhetoTic. Contrary to the traditional orientation, according to which rhetoric is conceived as the kind of
thing we 'leam in school', this work of Aristotle must be taken as the first
systematic hermeneutic of the everydayness of Being with one another.
Publicness, as the kind of Being which belongs to the "they" (Cf. Section
27), not only has in general its own way ofhaving a mood, but needs
moods and 'makes' them for itself. It is into such a mood and out of such
a mood that the orator speaks. He must understand the possibilities of
moods in order to rouse them and guide them aright.
How the Interpretation of the affects was carried further in the Stoa,
and how it was handed down to modem times through patristic and
scholastic theology, is weIl known. What has escaped notice is that the
basic ontological Interpretation of the affective life in general has been able
to make scarcely one forward step worthy of mention since Aristotle. On
the contrary, affects and feelings come under the theme of psychical
phenomena, functioning as a third class of these, usually along with ideation [Vorstellen] and volition. They sink to the level of accompanying
phenomena.
1t has been one of the merits of phenomenological research that it has
again brought these phenomena more unrestrictedly into our sight. Not
only that: Scheler, accepting the challenges of Augustine and Pascal,v
has guided the problematic to a consideration of how acts which 'represent' and acts which 'take an interest' are interconnected in their foundations. But even here the existential-ontological foundations of the
phenomenon of the act in general are admittedly still obscure.
A state-of-mind not only discloses Dasein in its thrownness and its
submission to that world which is already disclosed with its own Being;
it is itself the existential kind of Being in which Dasein constantly surrenders itself to the 'world' and lets the 'world' "matter" to it in such a
way that somehow Dasein evades its very self. The existential constitution
of such evasion will become clear in the phenomenon of falling.
A state-of-mind is a basic existential way in which Dasein is its "there".
It not only characterizes Dasein ontologically, but, because of what it
discloses, it is at the same time methodologically significant in principle

I. 5
Being and Time
179
for the existential analytic. Like any ontological Interpretation whatsoever, this analytic can only, so to speak, "listen in" to sorne previously
disclosed entity as regards its Being. And it will attach itself to Dasein's
distinctive and most far-reaching possibilities of disclosure, in order to
get information about this entity from these. Phenomenological Interpretation must make it possible for Dasein itself to disclose things primordially; it must, as it were, let Dasein interpret itself. Such Interpretation
takes part in this disclosure only in order to raise to a conceptuallevel the
phenomenal content ofwhat has been disclosed, and to do so existentially.
Later (Cf. Section 40)1 we shall provide an Interpretation of anxiety
as such a basic state-of-mind of Dasein, and as one which issignificant from
the existential-ontological standpoint; with this in view, we shaIl now
illustrate the phenomenon of state-of-mind even more concretely in its
determinate mode ofjeaT.
~ 30. FeaT as a Mode ofState-oJ-Mind

There are three points of view from which the phenomenon offear may
be consi.dered. We shaIl analyse: (1) that in the face ofwhich we fear,
(2) feanng, and (3) that about which we fear. These possible ways of
looking at fear are not accidentaI; they belong together. With them the
general structure of states-of-mind COrnes to the fore. We shall complete
our analysis by alluding to the possible ways in which fear may be
modified; each ofthese pertains to different items in the structure offear.
That in thejace ofwhich we fear, the 'fearsome',2 is in every case something which we encounter within-the-world and which may have either
readiness-to-hand, presence-at-hand, or Dasein-wit'j as its kindof Being.
We are not going to make an ontical report on those entities which can
often and for the most part be 'fearsome': we are to define the fearsome
phenomenally in its fearsomeness. What do we encounter in fearing that
belongs to the fearsome as such? That in the face of which we fear can
be characterized as threatening. Here several points must be considered.
1. What we encounter has detrimentality as its kind of involvement. 1t
shows itself within a context of involvements. 2. The target of this detrimentality is a definite range ofwhat can be affected by it; thus the detrimentality is itselfmade definite, and come~; from a definite region. 3. The
region itself is weIl known as such, and so i:; that which is coming from it;
but that which is coming from it has something 'queer' about it. 3 4. That
whieh is detrimental, as something that threatens us, is not yet within
1 The earliest editions cite Section 39 rather than Section 40. This has been corrected

in the list of errata.
Il 'Das Wovor der Furcht, das Furchtbare ..•'
B ' ••• mit dem es nicht "geheuer" ist.'

14 1

180
Being and Time
I. 5
striking distance [in beherrschbarer Nahe], but it is coming close. In such
a drawing-close, the detrimentality radiates out, and therein lies its
threatening character. 5. This drawing-close is within what is close by.
Indeed, something may bedetrimental in the highest degree and mayeven
be coming constantly closer; but if it is still far off, its fearsomeness remains
veiled. If, however, that which is detrimental draws close and is close by,
then it is threatening: it can reach us, and yet it may not. As it draws close,
this 'it can, and yet in the end it may not' becomes aggravated. We say,
"It is fearsome". 6. This implies that what is detrimental as comingclose close by carries with it the patent possibility that it may stay away
and pass us by; but instead of lessening or extinguishing our fearing, this
enhances it.
ln fearing as such, what we have thus characterîzed as threatening is
freed and allowed to matter to us. We do not first ascertain a future evil
(malum futurum) and then fear it. But neither does fearing first take note
of what is drawing close; it discovers it beforehand in its fearsomeness.
And in fearing, fear can then look at the fearsome explicitly, and 'make it
clear' to itself. Circumspection sees the fearsome because it has fear as its
state-of-mind. Fearing, as a slumbering possibility of Being-in-the-world
in a state-of-mind (we calI this possibility 'fearfulness' ["Furchtsamkeit"J),
has already disclosed the world, in that out of it something like the fearsome may come close. The potentiality for coming close is itself freed by
the essential existential spatiality of Being-in-the-world.
That zL'hich fear fears about is that very entity which is afraid-Dasein. 1
Only an entity for which in its Being this very Being is an issue, can be
afraid. Fearing discloses this entity as endangered and abandoned to
itsclf. Fear always reveals Dasein in the Being of its "there", even if it
does so in varying degrees of explicitness. If we fear about our house and
home, this cannot be cited as an instance contrary to the above definition
of what we fear about; for as Being-in-the-world, Dasein is in every case
concernful Being-alongside. 2 Proximally and for the most part, Dasein is
l

'Das H"orum die Furcht fürchtet, ist das sich fürchtende Seiende selbst, das

Da~ein.' "'hile it is convenient to translate 'das Worum der Furcht' as 'that which one

fcars ahout', this expression must be taken in a narrower sense than one would ordinarily
expect in English. What Heidegger generalIy has in mind is rather the person on whose
bchalj or for ll'hose sake one fears. (Cf. our remark;s on oum' in note l, p. Q3, H. 65, ~nd
note 2, p. 98, H. 69 above.) Thus 'fürchten um cornes closer to the ordmary ~eanmg
of'fear for' than it does to that of'fear about'. We shalI soon see, however, that Heidegger
also uses the expression 'fürchten für', for which 'fear for' would seem to be the natura!
translation. ~otice that what he then has in mind-namely, our fearing for Others-is
only a special case of 'fearing for' in the ordinary English sense, and likewise only a special
ca,e of what we shaH calI 'fearing about' in this translation.
2 'Sein bei'. Here our usual translation, 'Being-alongside', fails to bring out the conneetion. i\ German reader would recall at once that Obei' may mean, "at the home of' like
the French 'chez'. See our note 3, p. 80, H. 54 above.

1. 5
Being and Time
181
in te~ ~f what it is concemed with. When this is endangered, Beingalongslde IS threatened. Fear discloses Dasein predominantly in a privative
way. It bewilders us and makes us close our heads'. Fear closes off our
endangered Being-in, and yet at the same time lets us see it, so that when
the fear has subsided, Dasein must first find its way about again.
~h~ther privatively or positively, fearing about something, as beingafraId f i the face of something, always discloses equiprimordially entities
within-the-world and Being-in-the former as threatening and the latter
as threatened. Fear is a mode ofstate-of-mind.
One can also fear about Others, and we then speak of "fearing for"
them [Fürchten für sie]. This fearing for the Other does not take away his
fear. Such a possibility has been ruled out already, because the Other,
for whom we fear, need not fear at all on his part. It is precisely when the
Other is not afraid and charges recklessly at what is threatening him that
we fear mostfor him. Fearing-for is a way of having a co-state-of-mind
~th Others, but not necessarily a being-afraid-with or even a fearingwlth-one-another. 1 One can "fear about" without "being-afraid". Yet
when viewed more strictly, fearing-about is "being-afraid-for-oneseif". 2
Here what one "is apprehensive about" is one's Being-with with the
Other, who might be tom away from one. 3 That which is fearsome is not
aimed directly at him who fears with someone else. Fearing-about knows
that in a certain way it is unaffected, and yet it is co-affected in so far as
the Dasein-with for which it fears is affected. Fearing-about is therefore
not a weaker form of being-afraid. Here the issue is one of existential
modes, not of degrees of 'feeling-tones'. Fearing-about does not lose its
specific genuiness even if it is not 'really' afraid.
There can be variations in the constitutive items of the full phenomenon
of fear. Accordingly, different possibilities of Being emerge in fearing.
Bringing-close close by, belongs to the structure of the threatening as
encounterable. If something threatening breaks in suddenly upon concernful Being-in-the-world (something threatening in its 'not right away,
but any moment'), fear becomes alarm [Erschrecken]. 50, in what is
threatening we must distinguish between the closest way in which it
brings itself close, and the manner in which this bringing-close gets
encountered-its suddenness.That in the face ofwhich we are alarmed is
proximally something well known and familiar. But if, on the other hand,
l 'Fürchten ftir ... ist eine Weise der Mithefindlichkeit mit den Anderen, aber nicht
notwendig ein Sich-rnitftirchten oder gar ein Miteinanderftirchten.'
2 'ein Sichftirchten'. We have hitherto translated 'sich ftirchten' with various forms of
'be afraid', which is its usual signification in ordinary German. In this passage, however
the emphasis on the refiexive pronoun 'sich' clearly calIs for 'being-afraid-for-oneseif'.
'
8 ' "Befürchtet" ist dabei das Mitsein mit dem Anderen, der einem entrissen werden
konnte.'

142

1 82
Being and Time
I. 5
that which threatens has the character ofsomething altogether unfamiliar,
then fear becomes dread [Grauen]. And where that which threatens is laden
with dread, and is at the same time encountered with the suddenness of
the alarming, then fear becomes terror [Entsetzen]. There are further
variations offear, which we know as timidity, shyness, misgiving, becoming startled. AH modifications of fear, as possibilities of having a state-ofmind, point to the fact that Dasein as Being-in-the-world is 'fearful'
["furchtsam"]. This 'fearfulness' is not to be understood in an ontical
sense as sorne factical 'individualized' disposition, 1 but as an existential
possibility of the essential state-of-mind of Dasein in general, though of
course it is not the only one.

'il 3 1 • Being-there as Understanding

143

State-of-mind is one of the existential structures in which the Being of
the 'there' maintains itself. Equiprimordial with it in constituting this
Being is understanding. A state-of-mind always has its understanding, even
if it merely keeps it suppressed. Understanding always has its mood. If
we Interpret understanding as a fundamental existentiale, this indicates
that this phenomenon is conceived as a basic mode of Dasein's Being. On
the other hand, 'understanding' in the sense of one possible kind of cognizing among others (as distinguished, for instance, from 'explaining'),
must, like explaining, be Interpreted as an existential derivative of that
primary understanding which is one of the constituents of the Being of
the "there" in general.
We have, after aH, already come up against this primordial understanding in our previous investigations, though we did not aHow it to be
included explicitly in the theme under discussion. To say that in existing,
Dasein is its "there", is equivalent to saying that the world is 'there'; its
Being-there is Being-in. And the latter is likewise 'there', as that for the sake
of which Dasein is. In the "for-the-sake-of-which", existing Being-in-theworld is disclosed as such, and this disclosedness we have caHed "understanding". vii In the understanding of the "for-the-sake-of-which", the
significance which is grounded therein, is diselosed along with it. The
disclosedness of understanding, as the disclosedness of the "for-the-sakeof-which" and of significance equiprimordiaHy, pertains to the entirety of
Being-in-the-world. Significance is tnat on the basis of which the world is
disclosed as such. To say that the "for-the-sake-of-which" and significance
are both disclosed in Dasein, means that Dasein is that entity which, as
Being-in-the-world, is an issue for itself.
1'. . . im ontischen Sinne einer faktischen, "vereinzelten" Veranlagung .. .' While the
verb 'vereinzeln' often means 'to isolate', Heidegger does not ordinarily use it in this
sense. Indeed he contrasts it with the verb 'isolieren'. Cf. H. 188 below.

1. 5
Being and Time
183
W~en we are talking onticaHy we sometimes use the expression 'understandmg something' with the signification of 'being able to manage
something', 'being a Inatch for it', 'being competent to do something'.1
ln understanding, as an existentiale, that which we have such competence
over .is not a "what", but Being as existing. The kind of Being which
Dase~n ~as, as poten~iality-for-Being, lies existentially in understanding,
Dasem IS ~ot something present-at-hand which possesses its competence
for somethmg by way of an extra; it is primarily Being-possible. Dasein is
in every case what it can be, and in the way in which it is its possibility.
!he ~e~ng-possible which is essential for Dasein, pertains to the ways of
Its SOhcltude for Others and of its concern with the 'world', as we have
characterized them; and in aH these, and always, it pertains to Dasein's
potentiality-for-Being towards itself, for the sake of itself. The Beingp?s~ible. which Dasein is existentiaHy in every case, is to be sharply
dlstmgUlshed both from empty logical possibilityand from the contingency
of something present-at-hand, so far as with the present-at-hand this or
that can 'come to pass',2 As a modal category of presence-at-hand,
possibility signifies what is notyet actual and what is not at any time necessary.
It characterizes the merely possible. Ontologically it is on a lower level than
actualityand necessity. On the other hand, possibility as an existentiale is
the most primordial and ultimate positive way in which Dasein is
characterized ontologicaHy. As with existentiality in general, we can, in
the first instance, ooly prepare for the problem ofpossibility. The phenomenal basis for seeing it at ail is provided by the understanding as a disclosive potentiality-for-Being.
Possibility, as an existentiale, does not signify a free-floating potentialityfor-Being in the sense of the 'liberty of indifference' (libertas indifferentiae).
ln every case Dasein, as essentiaily having a state-of-mind, has already
got itself into definite possibilities, As the potentiality-for-Being which is
is, it has let such possibilities pass by; it is constantly waiving the possibilities of its Being, or else it seizes upon them and Inakes mistakes. 3 But
this means that Dasein is Being-possible which has been delivered over to
itself-thrown possibility through and through. Dasein is the possibility of
Being-free for its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. Its Being-possible is
transparent to itself in different possible ways and degrees.
Understanding. is the Being of such potentiality-for-Being, which is
l '. . . in der Bedeutung von "einer Sache vorstehen kônnen", "ihr gewachsen sein",
"etwas kônnen".' The expression 'vorstehen' ('to manage', 'to be in charge') is here
connected with 'verstehen' ('to understand').
2 ' ••• von der Kontingenz eines Vorhandenen, sofem mit diesem das und jenes "passieren" kann.'
a •••• ergreift sie und vergreift sich.'

144

184

145

Being and Time
I. 5
never something still outstanding as not yet present-at-hand, but which,
as something which is essentiaUy never present-at-hand, 'is' with the
Being of Dasein, in the sense of existence. Dasein is such that in every case
it has understood (or alternatively, not understood) that it is to be thus or
thus. As such understanding it 'knows' what it is capable of-that is, what
its potentiality-for-Being is capable of. 1 This 'knowing' does not first arise
from an immanent self-perception, but belongs to the Being ofthe "there",
which is essentiaUy understanding. And only because Dasein, in understanding, is its "there", can it go astray and fail to recognize itself. And
in so fur as understanding is accompanied by state-of-mind and as such is
existentiaUy surrendered to thrownness, Dasein has in every case already
gone astray and failed to recognize itself. In its potentiality-for-Being it
is therefore delivered over to the possibility of first finding itself again in
its possibilities.
Understanding is the existential Being of Dasein's own potentiality-Jor-Being;
and it is so in such a way that this Being discloses in itself what its Being is capable
Of2 We must grasp the structure ofthis existentiale more precisely.
As a disclosure, understanding always pertains to the whole basic
state of Being-in-the-world. As a potentiality-for-Being, any Being-in is a
potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world. Not only is the world, qua world,
disclosed as possible significance, but when that whieh is within-theworld is itselffreed, this entity is freed for its own possibilities. That which
is ready-to-hand is discovered as such in its serviceability, its usability, and
its detrimentality. The totality of involvements is revealed as the categorial
whole of a possible interconnection of the ready-to-hand. But even the
'unity' of the manifold present-at-hand, of Nature, can be discovered
only if a possibility ofit has been disclosed. ls it accidentaI that the question
about the Being of Nature aims at the 'conditions of its possibility'? On
what is such an inquiry based? When confronted with this inquiry, we
cannot leave aside the question: why are entities which are not of the
character of Dasein understood in their Being, if they are disclosed in
accordance with the conditions of their possibility? Kant presupposes
something of the sort, perhaps rightly. But this presupposition itself
is something that cannot be left without demonstrating how it is
justified.
Why does the understanding-whatever may be the essential dimensions of that which can be disclosed in it-always press forward into
possibilities? It is because the understanding has in itself the existential
.1 'Ais .solches Verstehen

"weiss" es, WOTan es mit ihm seIbst, das heisst seinem Sein-

konnen lSt.'
2 ' ••• so zwaT, dass dieses Sein an ihm selbst das WOTan des mit ihm selbst Seins "s,hliesst.'

J. 5
Being and Time
185
structure which we caU "projection".1 With equal primordiality the understanding projects Dasein's Being both upon its "for-the-sake-of-which"
and upon significance, as the worldhood of its current world. The character of understanding as projection is constitutive for Being-in-the-world
with regard to the disclosedness of its existentiaUy constitutive state-ofBeing by which the factical potentiality-for-Being gets its leeway
[Spielraum]. And as thrown, Dasein is thrown into the kind of Being
which we caU "projecting". Projecting has nothing to do with comporting
oneselftowards a plan that has been thought out, and in accordance with
which Dasein arranges its Being. On the contrary, any Dasein has, as
Dasein, already projected itself; and as long as it is, it is projecting. As
long as it is, Dasein always has understood itself and always will understand itself in terms of possibilities. Furthermore, the character of understanding as projection is such that the understanding does not grasp
thematicaUy that upon which it projects-that is to say, possibilities.
Grasping it in such a manner would take away from what is projected its
very character as a possibility, and would reduce it to the given contents
which we have in mind; whereas projection, in throwing, throws before
itself the possibility as possibility, and lets it be as such. 2 As projecting,
understanding is the kind of Being of Dasein in which it is its possibilities
as possibilities.
Because of the kind of Being which is constituted by the existentiale of
projection, Dasein is constantly 'more' than it factually is, supposing that
one might want to make an inventory of it as something-at-hand and list
the contents of its Being, and supposing that one were able to do so. But
Dasein is never more than it factically is, for to its facticity its potentialityfor-Being belongs essentiaUy. Yet as Being-possible, moreover, Dasein is
never anything less; that is to say, it is existentiaUy that which, in its
l

'Entwurf'. The basic meaning ofthis noun and the cognate verb 'entwerfen' is that of

:thro~ng' something 'off' or 'away' from one; but in ordinary German usage and often

He'~egger, they take on the sense of'designing' or 'sketching' sorne 'project' ~hich is to
be ~ned through.; an~ they m~y a,lso be use~ in the more special sense of 'projection' in
~hic::h ~ geomet~r IS sald to proJect a curve upon' a plane. The words 'projection' and
proJect accordmgly lend themseIves rather weIl to translating these words in many
contexts, especially since their root meanings are very similar to those of 'Entwurf' and
'en!Werfen'; but while. the root meaning of 'throwing· off' is still very much alive in
!IelC!-eg~er'~ Ger~an! It, has ~Im?st entirely died out in the ordinary English usage of
8roJecuon and proJect, whlch 10 turn have taken on some connotations not feh in the
e~~•. Thus when. in the En!l"lis~ translation Dasein is said to 'project' entities, or
posslbIllues, or even Its own Bemg upon' something, the reader should hear in mind
that the root meaning of 'throwing' is more strongly feh in the German than in the
translation.
s ' ••. z!eht '::' ~erab .zu einem gegebenen, gemeinten Bestand, wahrend der Entwurf im
erfe~ die Moghchkelt ais Moglichkeit sich vorwirft und ais solche sein liisst.' The expresSion 'emem etwas vorwerfen' means literally to 'throw something forward to someone'
b~t of!:en ~as the, con~otation of 'reproaching him with something', or 'throwing som~
thing 10 hlS teeth . Heidegger may have more than one of these significations in mind.
10

'Y

186
Being and Time
1. 5
potentiality-for-Being, it is not yet. Only because the Being of the "there"
receives its Constitution through understanding and through the character ofunderstanding as projection, only because it is what it becomes (or
alternatively, does not become), can it say to itself'Become what you are',
and say this with understanding.
Projection always pertains to the full disclosedness of Being-in-theworld; as potentiality-for-Being, understanding has itself possibilities,
which are sketched out beforehand within the range of what is essentially
disclosable in it. Understanding can devote itself primarily to the disclosedness of the world; that is, Dasein can, proximally and for the most
part, understand itself in terms of its world. Or else understanding throws
itself primarily into the "for-the-sake-of-which"; that is, Dasein exists as
itself. Understanding is either authentic, arising out of one's own Self as
such, or inauthentic. The cino' of "inauthentic" does not mean that
Dasein cuts itself off from its Self and understands 'only' the world. The
world belongs to Being-one's-Self as Being-in-the-world. On the other
hand, authentic understanding, no less than that which i~ inauthentic,
can be either genuine or not genuine. As potentiality-for-Being, understanding is altogether permeated with possibility. When one is diverted
into [Sichverlegen in] one ofthese basic possibilities ofunderstanding, the
other is not laid aside [legt ... nicht ab]. Because understanding, in every case,
pertains rather to Dasein's fuil disclosedness as Being-in-the-world, this diversion
qf the understanding is an existential modification qfprojection as a whole. In understanding the world, Being-in is always understood along with it, while
understanding ofexistence as such is always an understanding of the world.
As factical Dasein, any Dasein has already diverted its potentiality-for.
Being into a possibility of understanding.
In its projective character, understanding goes to make up existentially
what we calI Dasein's "sight" [Siche]. With the disclosedness of the "there"
this sight is existentially [existenzial seiende]; and Dasein is this sigh~
equiprimordially in each of those basic ways of its Being which we have
already noted: as the circumspection [Umsicht] of concern, as the considerateness [Rücksicht] of solicitude, and as that sight which is directed
upon Being as such [Sicht auf das Sein aIs solches], for the sake ofwhich
any Dasein is as it is. The sight which is related primarily and on the whole
to existence we calI "transparency" [Durchsichtigkeit]. We choose this term
to designate 'knowledge of the Self'l in a sense which is well understood ,
.1' "Selbsterkenntnis" '. This should be carefully distinguished from the 'Sichkennen'

dlScuss~ o? H. 124-125. Perhaps this distinction can be expressed-though rather crudely
-by p01~tJ.ng ~lUt. that. we. are her~ co~cerned with a full and sophisticated knowledge of
~e Self,fi aIl 118 Imph~tlO.ns, while fi the earlier passage we were concerned with the

kind of self-knowledge whlch one loses when one 'forgets oneself' or does something so
out of character that one 'no longer knows oneself'.

I. 5
Being and Time
187
so as to indicate that here it is not a matter ofperceptually tracking down
and inspecting a point called the "Self", but rather one ofseizing upon the
full disclosedness ofBeing-in-the-world throughout ail the constitutive items
which are essential to it, and doing so with understanding. In existing,
entities sight 'themselves' [sichtet "sich"] only in so far as they have
become transparent to themselves with equal primordiality in those items
which are constitutive for their existence: their Being-alongside the
world and their Being-with Others.
On the other hand, Dasein's opaqueness [Undurchsichtigkeit] is not
rooted primarily and solely in 'egocentric' self-deceptions; it is rooted just
as much in lack of acquaintance with the world.
We must, to be sure, guard against a misunderstanding of the expression
'sight'. It corresponds to the "clearedness" [Gelichtetheit] which we took
as characterizing the disclosedness of the "there". 'Seeing' does not mean
just perceiving with the bodily eyes, but neither does it mean pure nonsensory awareness of something present-at-hand in its presence-at-hand.
ln giving an existential signification to "sight", we have merely drawn
upon the peculiar feature ofseeing, that it lets entities which are accessible
to it be encountered unconcealedly in themselves. Of course, every 'sense'
does this within that domain of discovery which is genuinely its own. But
from the beginning onwards the tradition of philosophy has been oriented
primarily towards 'seeing' as a way of access to entities and to Being. To
keep the connection with this tradition, we may formalize "sight" and
"seeing" enough to obtain therewith a universal term for characterizing
any access to entities or to Being, as access in general.
By showing how all sight is grounded primarily in understanding (the
circumspection of concern is understanding as common sense [Verstandigkeit]), we have deprived pure intuition [Anschauen] ofits priority, which
corresponds noetically to the priority of the present-at-hand in traditional
ontology. 'Intuition' and 'thinking' are both derivatives ofunderstanding,
and already rather remote ones. Even the phenomenological 'intuition of
essences' ["Wesensschau"] is grounded in existential understanding. We
can decide about this kind of seeing only if we have obtained explicit
conceptions ofBeing and of the structure ofBeing,such as onlyphenomena
in the phenomenological sense can become.
The disclosedness of the "there" in understanding is itself a way of
Dasein's potentiality-for-Being. In the way in which its Being is projected
both upon the "for-the-sake-of-which" and upon significance (the world),
there lies the disclosedness of Being in general. Understanding of Being
has already been taken for granted in projecting upon possibilities. In
projection, Being is understood, though not ontologically conceived. An

147

Being and Tirne
I. 5
entity whose kind of Being is the essential projection of Being-in-theworld has understanding ofBeing, and has this as constitutive for its Being.
What was posited dogmatically at an earlier stageV111 now gets exhibited
in terms of the Constitution of the Being in which Dasein as understanding
is its "there". The existential meaning of this understanding of Being
cannot be satisfactorily c1arified within the limits of this investigation
except on the basis of the Temporal Interpretation ofBeing.
As existentialia, states-of-mind and understanding characterize the
primordial disc10sedness ofBeing-in-the-world. By way ofhaving a mood,
Dasein 'sees' possibilities, in terms of which it is. In the projective
disc10sure of such possibilities, it already has a mood in every case.
The projection of its ownmost potentiality-for-Being has been delivered
over to the Fact of its thrownness into the "there". Has not Dasein's
Being become more enigmatical now that we have explicated the
existential constitution of the Being of the "there" in the sense of thrown
projection? It has indeed. We must first let the full enigmatical character
of this Being emerge, even if all we can do is to come to a genuine breakdown over its 'solution', and to formulate anew the question about the
Being of thrown projective Being-in-the-world.
But in the first instance, even if we are just to bring into view the everyday kind of Being in which there is understanding with a state-of-mind,
and ifwe are to do so in a way which is phenomenally adequate to the full
disc10sedness of the "there", we must work out these existentialia concrete1y.l
188

148

~ 32.

Understanding and Interpretation 2
As understanding, Dasein projects its Being upon possibilities. This
Being-towards-possibilities which understands is itse1f a potentiality-forBeing, and it is so because of the way these possibilities, as disclosed,
exert their counter-thrust [Rückschlag] upon Dasein. The projecting of
the understanding has its own possibility-that of deve10ping itse1f [sich
auszubilden]. This deve10pment of the understanding we calI "interpretation". 3 In it the understanding appropriates understandingly that
which is understood by it. In interpretation, understanding does not
become something different. It becomes itse1f. Such interpretation is
grounded existentially in understanding; the latter does not arise from the
former. Nor is interpretation the acquiring of information about what is
'konkreten'. The earlier editions have 'konkreteren' ('more concretely').
2 'Auslegung'. See our note 3, p. 19, H. 1 above.
3 'Auslegung'. The older editions have 'A u sIe g u n g'.

l

J.5

Being and Time
189
understood; it is rather the working-out of possibilities projected in
understanding. In accordance with the trend of these preparatory
analyses of everyday Dasein, we shall pursue the phenomenon of interpretation in understanding the world-that is, in inauthentic understanding, and indeed in the mode of its genuineness.
In terms of the significance which is disclosed in understanding the
world, concernful Being-alongside the ready-to-hand gives itself to
understand whatever involvement that which is encountered can have. l
To say that "circumspection discovers" means that the 'world' which has
already been understood comes to be interpreted. The ready-to-hand
comes explicitly into the sight which understands. AlI preparing, putting to
rights, repairing, improving, rounding-out, are accomplished in the
following way: we take apart 2 in its "in-order-to" that which is circumspective1y ready-to-hand, and we concern ourse1ves with it in accordance
with what becomes visible through this process. That which has been
circumspective1y taken apart with regard to its "in-order-to", and taken
apart as such-that which is explicitly understood-has the structure of
sornetking as sornetking. The circumspective question as to what this particular thing that is ready-to-hand may be, receives the circumspective1y
interpretative answer that it is for such and such a purpose [es ist zum ...].
Ifwe tell what it is for [des Wozu], we are not simply designating something; but that which is designated is understood as that as which we are
to take the thing in question. That which is disclosed in understandingthat which is understood-is already accessible in such a way that its 'as
which' can be made to stand out explicitly. The 'as' makes up the structure of the explicitness of something that is understood. It constitutes the
interpretation. In dealing with what is environmentally ready-to-hand
by interpreting it circumspective1y, we 'see' it as a table, a door, a carriage, or a bridge; but what we have thus interpreted [Ausge1egte] need
not necessarily be also taken apart [auseinander zu legen] by making an
assertion which definitely characterizes it. Any mere pre-predicative seeing
of the ready-to-hand is, in itse1f, something which already understands
and interprets. But does not the absence of such an 'as' make up the
mereness of any pure perception ofsomething? Whenever we see with this
kind of sight, we already do so understandingly and interpretative1y. In
the mere encountering of something, it is understood in terms of a totality
of involvements; and such seeing hides in itse1f the explicitness of the
assignment-re1ations (of the "in-order-to") which belong to that totality.
l ' .•. gibt sich ••. zu verstehen, welche Bewandtnis es je mit dem Begegnenden haben
kann.'
2 'auseinandergelegt'. Heidegger is contrasting the verb 'auslegen' (Iiterally, 'Iay out')
with the cognate 'auseinanderlegen' ('Iay asunder' or 'take apart').

149

Being and Time
I. 5
That which is understood gets Articulated when the entity to be understood is brought close interpretatively by taking as our clue the 'something as something'; and this Articulation lies before [liegt vor] our making
any thematic assertion about it. In such an assertion the 'as' does not
turn up for the first time; it just gets expressed for the first time, and this
is possible only in that it lies before us as something expressible. 1 The fact
that when we look at something, the explicitness of assertion can be absent,
does not justify our denying that there is any Articulative interpretation
in such mere seeing, and hence that there is any as-structure in it. When
we have to do with anything, the mere seeing of the Things which are
closest to us bears in itselfthe structure ofinterpretation, and in so primordial a manner that just to grasp something free, as it were, of the "as",
requires a certain readjustment. When we merely stare at something, our
just-having-it-before-us lies before us as a failure to understand it any more.
This grasping which is free of the "as", is a privation ofthe kind ofseeing
in which one mere{y understands. It is not more primordial than that kind
of seeing, but is derived from it. If the 'as' is ontically unexpressed, this
must not seduce us into overlooking it as a constitutive state for understanding, existential and a priori.
But if we never perceive equipment that is ready-to-hand without
already understanding and interpreting it, and if such perception lets us
circumspectively encounter something as something, does this not mean
that in the first instance we have experienced something purely presentat-hand, and then taken it as a door, as a house? This would be a
rnisunderstanding of the specifie way in which interpretation functions as
disclosure. In interpreting, we do not, so to speak, throw a 'signification'
over some naked thing which is present-at-hand, we do not stick a value
on it; but when something within-the-world is encountered as such, the
1 go

150

l ': •. was allein so moglich ist, dass es ais Aussprechbares vor-Iiegt.' Here we follow the
readmg of the earlier editions. The hyphen in 'vor-liegt' cornes at the end of the line in the
later editions, but is undoubtedly meant to suggest (like the itaIicization of the 'vor' in
the previous sentence) that this verb is to be interpreted with unusualliteralness.
This para~aph is noteworthy for an exploitation of the prefix 'aus' ('out'), which fails
to ~how up 10 our translation. Literally an 'Aussage' ('assertion') is something which is
'saId out'; an 'Auslegung' ('interpretation') is a 'laying-out'; that which is 'ausdrücklich'
('explicit') is something that has been 'pressed out'; that which is 'aussprechbar' (our
'expressible') is something that can be 'spoken out'.
The verbs 'ausdrücken' and 'aussprechen' are roughly synonymous; but 'aussprechen'
?ften has the more specific connotations of 'pronunciation', 'pronouncing oneself', 'speakmg one's mind', 'finishing what one has to say', etc. While it would be possible to reserve
'express' for 'ausdrücken' and translate 'aussprechen' by sorne such phrase as 'speak out',
it is more convenient to use 'express' for both verbs, especially since 'aussprechen' and its
derivatives have occurred very seldom before the present chapter, in which 'ausdrücken'
rarely appears. On the other hand, we can easily distinguish between the more frequent
'ausdrücklich' and 'ausgesprochen' by translating the latter as 'expressed' or 'expressly',
and reserving 'explicit' for bath 'ausdrücklich' and 'explizit'.

J. 5

Being and Time
IgI
thing in question already has an involvement which is disclosed in our
understanding of the world, and this involvement is one which gets laid
out by the interpretation. 1
The ready-to-hand is always understood in terms of a totality ofinvolvements. This totality need not be grasped explicitly by a thematic interpretation. Even if it has undergone such an interpretation, it recedes into
an understanding which does not stand out from the background. And
this is the very mode in which it is the essential foundation for everyday
circumspective interpretation. In every case this interpretation is grounded
in something we have in advance-in a fore-having. 2 As the appropriation of
understanding, the interpretation operates in Being towards a totality of
involvements which is already understood-a Being which understands.
When something is understood but is still veiled,it becomes unveiled byan
act of appropriation, and this is always done under the guidance of a
point of view, which fixes that with regard to which what is understood is
to be interpreted. In every case interpretation is grounded insomething we see
in advance-in afore-sight. This fore-sight 'takes the fust eut' out ofwhat has
been taken intoour fore-having, and it doesso with a viewto a definite way
in which this can beinterpreted. 3 Anything understood whichis held in our
fore-having and towards which we set our sights 'foresightedly', becomes
conceptualizable through the interpretation. In such an interpretation,
the way in which the entity we are interpreting is to be conceived can be
drawn from the entity itself, or the interpretation can force the entity
into concepts to which it is opposed in its manner of Being. In either case,
the interpretation has already decided for a definite way of conceiving it,
either with finality or with reservations; it is grounded in something we
grasp in advance-in a fore-conception.
Whenever something is interpreted as something, the interpretation
will be founded essentially upon fore-having, fore-sight, and fore-conception. An interpretation is never a presuppositionless apprehending of
l ' ... die durch die Auslegung herausgelegt wird.'
Il In this paragraph Heidegger introduces the important words 'Vorhabe', 'Vorsicht',

and 'Vorgriff'. 'Vorhabe' is perhaps best translated by sorne such expression as 'what we
have in advance' or 'what we have before us'; but we shall usually find it more convenient
to adopt the shorter term 'fore-having', occasionally resorting to hendiadys, as in the
present sentence, and we shall handle the other terms in the same manner. 'Vorsicht'
('what we see in advance' or 'fore-sight') is the only one of these expressions which occurs
in ordinary German usage, and often has the connotation of 'caution' or 'prudence';
Heidegger, however, uses it in a more general sense somewhat more akin to the English
'foresight', without the connotation ofa shrewd and accurate prediction. 'Vorgriff' ('what
we grasp in advance' or 'fore-conception') is related to the verb 'vorgreifen' ('to anticipate') as well as to the noun "Begriff".
3 'Die Auslegung gründetjeweils in einer Vorsicht, die das in Vorhabe Genommene auf
cine bestimmte Auslegbarkeit hin "anschneidet".' The idea seems to be that just as the
~rson who cuts off the first slice of a loaf of bread gets the loaf 'started', the fore-sight
makes a Hart' on what we have in advance-the fore-having.

Being and Ttme
J.5
something presented to us. If, when one is engaged in a particular concrete kind of interpretation, in the sense of exact textual Interpretation,
one likes to appeal [beruft] to what 'stands there', then one finds that
what 'stands there' in the first instance is nothing other than the obvious
undiscussed assumption [Vormeinung] of the person who does the
interpreting. In an interpretative approach there lies such an assumption,
as that which has been 'taken for granted' ["gesetzt"] with the interpretation as such-that is to say, as that which has been presented in our
fore-having, our fore-sight, and our fore-conception.
How are we to conceive the character of this 'fore' ? Have we done so if
we say foqnally that this is something 'a priori'? Why does understanding,
which we have designated as a fundamental existentiale of Dasein, have
this structure as its own? Anything interpreted, as something interpreted,
has the 'as'-structure as its own; and how is this related to the 'fore'
structure? The phenomenon of the 'as'-structure is manifestly not to be
dissolved or broken up 'into pieces'. But is a primordial analytic for it
thus ruled out? Are we to concede that such phenomena are 'ultimates'?
Then there would still remain the question, "why?" Or do the forestructure of understanding and the as-structure of interpretation show an
existential-ontological connection with the phenomenon of projection?
And does this phenomenon point back to a primordial state of Dasein's
Being?
Before we answer these questions, for which the preparation up till now
has been far from sufficient, we must investigate whether what has become
visible as the fore-structure of understanding and the as-structure of
interpretation, does not itself already present us with a unitary phenomenon-one of which copious use is made in philosophical problematics,
though what is used so universally falls short of the primordiality of
ontological explication.
In the projecting of the understanding, entities are disclosed in their
possibility. The character of the possibility corresponds, on each occasion,
with the kind of Being of the entity which is understood. Entities withinthe-world generally are projected upon the world-that is, upon a whole
of significance, to whose reference-relations concern, as Being-in-theworld, has been tied up in advance. When entities within-the-world are
discovered along with the Being ofDasein-that is, when they have come
to be understood-we say that they have meaning [Sinn]. But that which
is understood, taken strictly is not the meaning but the entity, or
192

l

15 1

V.

l '. • • eines
orgegebenen.' Here, as in many other passages, we have translated
'v?rge~n' by varl(~us forms of the verb 'to present'; but it would perhaps be more in line
Wlth Heldegger's dlScussion of the prefix 'vor-' to write '... ofsomething fore-given'.

I. 5
Being and Time
193
alternatively, Being. Meaning is that wherein the intelligibility [Verstandlichkeit] ofsomething maintains itself. That which can beArticulated in a
disclosure by which we understand, we calI "meaning". The concept of
meaning embraces the formaI existential framework of what necessarily
belongs to that which an understanding interpretation Articulates.
Meaning is the "upon-which" of a projection in terms of which something becomes
intelligible as something; it gets its structure from a fore-having, a fore-sight, and
a fore-conception. l In so far as understanding and interpretation make up
the existential state ofBeing ofthe "there", "meaning" must be conceived
as the formal-existential framework of the disclosedness which belongs to
understanding. Meaning is an existentiale of Dasein, not a property
attaching to entities, lying 'behind' them, or floating somewhere as an
'intermediate domain'. Dasein only 'has' meaning, so far as the
disclosedness of Being-in-the-world can be 'filled in' by the entities dis:overable in that disclosedness. 2 Bence onry Dasein can be meaningful [sinnJOll] or meaningless [sinnlos]. That is to say, its own Being and the entities
:lisclosed with its Being can be appropriated in understanding, or can
:emain relegated to non-understanding.
This Interpretation of the concept of 'meaning' is one which is ontologico-cxistential in principle; if we adhere to it, then aIl entities whose
kind of Being is of a character other than Dasein's must be conceived as
unmeaning [unsinniges] , essentiaUy devoid of any meaning at aU. Here
'unmeaning' does not signify that we are saying anything about the
value of such entities, but it gives expression to an ontological
characteristic. And onry that which is unmeaning can be absurd [widersinnig].
The present-at-hand, as Dasein encounters it, can, as it were, assault
Dasein's Being; natural events, for instance, can break in upon us and
destroy us.
And if we are inquiring about the meaning of Being, our investigation
does not then become a "deep" one [tiefsinnig], nor does it puzzle out
what stands behind Being. It asks about Being itself in so far as Being
enters into the intelligibility of Dasein. The meaning ofBeing can never be
l'Sinn ist das durch Vorhabe, Vorsicht und Vorgiff strukturierte Woraufhin des Entwurfs, aus

dem her etwas ais etwas verstiindiich wird.' (Notice that our usual translation of 'verstandlich,
and 'Verstandlichkeit' as 'intelligible' and 'intelligibility', fails to show the connection of
the words with 'Verstandnis', etc. This connection could have been brought out
effective1y by writing 'understandable,' 'understandability', etc., but only at the cost of
awkwardness. )
2 'Sinn "hat" nur das Dasein, sofern die Erschlossenheit des In-der-We1t-seins durch
das in ihr entdeckbare Seiende "erftillbar" ist.' The point ofthis puzzling and ambiguous
sentence may become somewhat c1earer if the reader recalls that here as e1sewhere (see
H. 75 above) the verb 'erschliessen' ('disc1ose') is used in the sense of'opening something
up' so that its contents can be 'discovered'. What thus gets 'opened up' will then be 'filled
in' as more and more of its contents get discovered.
G

152

153

194
Being and Time
I. 5
contrasted with entltles, or with Being as the 'ground' which gives
entities support; for a 'ground' becomes accessible only as meaning, even
if it is itself the abyss of meaninglessness. 1
As the disc10sedness of the "there", understanding always pertains to
the whole of Being-in-the-world. In every understanding of the world,
existence is understood with it, and vice versa. AlI interpretation, moreover,
operates in the fore-structure, which we have already characterized. Any
interpretation which is to contribute understanding, must already have
understood what is to be interpreted. This is a fact that has always been
remarked, even if only in the area of derivative ways of understanding and
interpretation, such as philological Interpretation. The latter belongs
within the range of scientific knowledge. Such knowledge demands the
rigour of a demonstration to provide grounds for it. In a scientific proof,
we may not presuppose what it is our task to provide grounds for. But if
interpretation must in any casealready operate in that which is understood, and if it must draw its nurture from this, how is it to bring any
scientific results to maturity without moving in a circ1e, especially if,
moreover, the understanding which is presupposed still operates within
our common information about man and the world? Yet according to
the most elementary rules of logic, this circle is a circulus vitiosus. If that be
so, however, the business of historiological interpretation is exc1uded
a priori from the domain of rigorous knowledge. In so far as the Fact of
this circ1e in understanding is not eliminated, historiology must then be
resigned to less rigorous possibilities of knowing. Historiology is permitted
to compensate for this defect to sorne extent through the 'spiritual signification' of its 'objects'. But even in the opinion of the historian himself,
it would admittedly be more ideal if the circ1e could be avoided and if
there remained the hope of creating sorne time a historiology which would
be as independent of the standpoint of the observer as our knowledge of
Nature is supposed to be.
But if we see this circle as a vicious one and look outfor ways of avoiding it, even if
we just 'sense' it as an inevitable imperfection, then the act of understanding
has been misunderstood from the ground up. The assimilation of understanding
and interpretation to a definite ideal of knowledge is not the issue here.
Such an ideal is itself only a subspecies of understanding-a subspecies
which has strayed into the legitimate task of grasping the present-athand in its essential unintelligibility [Unverstandlichkeit]. If the basic
conditions which make interpretation possible are to be fulfilled, this must
l 'Der Sinn von Sein kann nie in Gegensatz gebracht werden zum Seienden oder zum
Sein ais tragenden "Grund" des Seienden, weil "Grund" nur ais Sinn zugiinglich wird,
und sei er selbst der Abgrund der Sinnlosigkeit.' Notice the etymological kinship between
'Grund' ('ground') and 'Abgrund' ('abyss').

J.5

Being and Time
195
rather be done by not failing to recognize beforehand the essential
conditions under which it can be performed. What is decisive is not to get
out ofthe circle but to come into it in the right way. This circle ofunderstanding is not an orbit in which any random kind of knowledge may
move; it is the expression of the existentialfore-structure of Dasein itself.
It is not to be reduced to the level of a vicious circ1e, or even of a circle
which is merely tolerated. In the circle is hidden a positive possibility of
the most primordial kind ofknowing. To be sure, we genuinely take hold
of this possibility only when, in our interpretation, we have understood
that our first, last, and constant task is never to allow our fore-having,
fore-sight, and fore-conception to be presented to us by fancies and
popular conceptions, but rather to make the scientific theme secure by
working out these fore-structures in terms of the things themselves.
Because understanding, in accordance with its existential meaning, is
Dasein's own potentiality-for-Being, the 0l1-tological presuppositions of
historiological knowledge transcend in principle the idea of rigour held
in the most exact sciences. Mathematics is not more rigorous than historiology, but only narrower, because the existential foundations relevant
for it lie within a narrower range.
The 'circle' in understanding belongs to the structure of meaning, and
the latter phenomenon is rooted in the existential constitution ofDaseinthat is, in the understanding which interprets. An entity for which, as
Being-in-the-world, its Being is itself an issue, has, ontologically, a
circular structure. If, however, we note that 'circularity' belongs ontologically to a kind of Being which is present-at-hand (namely, to subsistence [Bestand]), we must altogether avoid using this phenomenon to
characterize anything like Dasein ontologically.
~ 33. Assertion as a Derivative Mode

of Interpretation

AlI interpretation is grounded on understanding. That which has been
articulated 1 as such in interpretation and sketched out beforehand in the
understanding in general as something articulable, is the meaning. In so
far as assertion ('judgment') 2 is grounded on understanding and presents
us with a derivative form in which an interpretation has been carried out,
it too 'has' a meaning. Yet this meaning cannot be defined as something
which occurs 'in' ["an"] a judgment along with the judging itself. In our
l 'Gegliederte'. The verbs 'artikulieren' and 'gliedem' cao both be translated by
'articulate' in English; even in German they are nearly synonymous, but in the former the
emphasis is presumably on the 'joints' at which something gets divided, while in the latter
the emphasis is presumably on the 'parts' or 'members'. We have distinguished between
them by translating 'artikulieren' by 'Articulate' (with a capital 'A'), and 'gliedem' by
'articulate' (with a lower-case initial).
Il ' ••• die Aussage (das "Urteil") .••'

154

J 96
Being and Tim4
I. 5
present context, we shall give an explicit analysis of assertion, and this
analysis will serve several purposes.
For one thing, it can be demonstrated, by considering assertion, in
what ways the structure of the 'as', which is constitutive for understanding
and interpretation, can be modified. When this has been done, both
understanding and interpretation will be brought more sharply into view.
For another thing, the analysis of assertion ·bas a special position in the
problematic of fundamental ontqlogy, because in the decisive period
when ancient ontology was beginning, the ~Oyos functioned as the only
clue for obtaining access to that which authentically i s [zum eigentlich
Seienden], and for defining the Being of such entities. Finally assertion
has been accepted from ancient times as the primary and authentic 'locus'
of truth. The phenomenon of truth is so thoroughly coupled with the
problem of Being that our investigation, as it proceeds further, will
necessarily come up against the problem of truth; and it already lies
within the dimensions of that problem, though not explicitly. The
analysis of assertion will at the same time prepare the way for this latter
problematic.
In what follows, we give three significations to the term "assertion".
These are drawn from the phenomenon which is thus designated, they
are connected among themselves, and in their unity they encompass the
full structure of assertion.
J. The primary signification of "assertion" is "pointing out" [Aufzeigen].
In this we adhere to the primordial meaning ofMoyos as à,1Tôef>avats-letting
an entity be seen from itself. In the assertion 'The hammer is too heavy',
what is discovered for sight is not a 'meaning', but an entity in the way
that it is ready-to-hand. Even if this entity is not close enough to be
grasped and 'seen', the pointing-out has in view the entity itself and not,
let us say, a mere "representation" [Vorstellung] of it-neither something 'merely represented' nor the psychical condition in which the persan
who makes the assertion "represents" it.
2. "Assertion" means no less than "preaication". We 'assert' a 'predicate'
of a 'subject', and the 'subject' is given a rIefinite character [bestimmt] by
the 'predicate'. In this signification of "assertion", that which is put
forward in the assertion [Das Ausgesagte] is not the predicate, but 'the
hammer itself'. On the other hand, that which does the asserting [Das
Aussagende] (in other words, that which gives something a definite
character) lies in the 'too heavy'. That which is put forward in the
assertion in the second signification of "assertion" (that which is given a
155 definite character, as such) has undergone a narrowing of content as
compared with what is put forward in the assertion in the first signification

J. 5

Being and Time

197

of this term. Every predication is what it is, only as a pointing-out. The
second signification of "assertion" has its foundation in the first. Within
this pointing-out, the elements which are Articulated in predication-the
subject and predicate-arise. It is not by giving something a definite
character that we first discover that which shows itself-the hammer-as
such; but when we give it such a character, our seeing gets restrictea to it
in the first instance, so that by this explicit restriction 1 of our view, that
which i~ already manifest may be made explicitly manifest in its definite
character. In giving something a definite character, we must, in the first
instance, take a step back when confronted with that which is already
manifest-the hammer that is too heavy. In 'setting down the subject', we
dim entities down to focus in 'that hammer there', so that by thus dimming
them down we may let that which is manifest be seen in its own definite
character as a characterthat can bedetermined. 2 Setting down the subject,
setting down the predicate, and setting down the two together, are
thoroughly 'apophantical' in the strict sense of the word.
3. "Assertion" means "communication" [Mitteilung] , speaking forth
[Heraussage]. As communication, it is directIy related to "assertion" in
the first and second significations. It is letting someone see with us what
we have pointed out by way of giving it a definite character. Letting
someone see with us shares with [teilt . . . mit] the Other that entity
which has been pointed out in its definite character. That which is
'shared' is our Being towaras what has been pointed out-a Being in which
we see it in common. One must keep in mind that this Being-towards is
Being-in-the-world, and that from out of this very world what has been
pointed out gets encountered. Any assertion, as a communication understood in this existential manner, must have been expressed. 3 As something
communicated, that which has been put forward in the assertion is
something that Others can 'share' with the person making the assertion,
even though the entity which he has pointed out and to which he has
given a definite character is not close enough for them to grasp and see it.
That which is put forward in the assertion is something which can be
passed along in 'further retelling'. There is a widening of the range of that
mutual sharing which sees. But at the same time, what has been pointed
out may become veiled again in this further retelling, although even the
kind of knowing which arises in such hearsay (whether knowledge that
1'Einschrtïnkung'. The older editions have 'Entschriinkung'.
das Seiende ab auf"der Hammer da", um durch
den Vollzug der Entblendung das Offenbare in seiner bestimmbaren Bestimmtheit
sehen zu lassen.'
3 'Zur Aussage ais der 50 existenzial verstandenen Mit-teilung gehôrt die Ausgesprochenheit.•
2 ' ••• die "Subjektsetzung" blendet

Ig8
Being and Time
1·5
something is the case [Wissen] or merely an acquaintance with something
[Kennen]) always has the entity itself in view and does not ogive assent'
to sorne 'valid meaning' which has been passed around. Even hearsay is a
Being-in-the-world, and a Being towards what is heard.
There is prevalent today a theory of 'judgment' which is oriented to the
phenomenon of'validity'.l We shall not give an extensive discussion ofit
here. It will be sufficient to allude to the very questionable character of
this phenomenon of 'validity', though since the time of Lotze people have
been fond of passing this off as a 'primaI phenomenon' which cannot
be traced back any further. The fact that it can play this role is due only
to its ontologically unclarified character. The 'problematic' which has
established itself round this idolized word is no less opaque. In the first
place, validity is viewed as the 'Jorm' of actualiry which goes with the content
of the judgment, in so far as that content remains unchanged as opposed
to the changeable 'psychical' process of judgment. Considering how the
status of the question of Being in general has been characterized in the
introduction to this treatise, we would scarcely venture to expect that
'validity' as 'ideal Being' is distinguished by special ontological clarity. In
the second place, "validity" means at the same time the validity of the
meaning ofthejudgment, which is valid of the 'Object' it has in view; and
thus it attains the signification of an 'Objectively valid character' and of
Objectivity in general. In the third place, the meaning which is thus
'valid' of an entity, and which is valid 'timelessly' in itself, is said to be
'valid' also in the sense of being validfor everyone who judges rationally.
"Validity" now means a bindingness, or 'universally valid' character. 2
Even if one were to advocate a 'critical' epistemological theory, according
to which the subject does not 'really' 'come out' to the Object, then this
valid character, as the validity of an Object (Objectivity) , is grounded
upon that stock of true (!) meaning which is itself valid. The three significations of 'being valid' which we have set forth-the way of Being of the
ideal, Objectivity, and bindingness-not only are opaque in themselves
but constandy get confused with one another. Methodological fore-sight
1 Heidegger uses three words which might conveniently be translated as 'validity':
'Geltung' (our 'validity'), 'Gültigkeit' (our 'valid character'), and 'Ge1ten' (our 'being
valid', ete.). The reader who has studied logic in English and who accordingly thinks of
'validity' as mere1y a property of arguments in which the premisses imply the conclusion,
must remember that in German the verb 'gelten' and its derivatives are used much more
broadly, 50 as to apply to almost anything that is commonly (or even privately) accepted,
50 that one can speak of the 'validity' of legal tender, the 'validity' of a ticket for so many
weeks or months, the 'validity' of that which 'holds' for me or for you, the 'validity' of
anything that is the case. While Heidegger's discussion does not coyer as many of these
meanings as will be listed in any good German dictionary, he goes weil beyond the
narrower usage orthe English-speaking logician. Of course, we shall often translate 'gelten'
in other ways.
:1 ' ••• Verbindlichkeit, "Allgemeingültigkeit".'

I. 5
Being and Time
199
demands that we do not choose such unstable concepts as a clue to Interpretation. We make no advance restriction upon the concept of "meaning" which would confine it to signifying the 'content of judgment', but
we understand it as the existential phenomenon already characterized, in
which the formaI framework ofwhat can be disclosed in understanding and
Articulated in interpretation becomes visible.
Ifwe bring together the three significations of 'assertion' which we have
analysed, and get a unitary view of the full phenomenon, then we may
define "assertion" as "a painting-out which gives something a definite character
and whick communicates". It remains to ask with whatjustification we have
taken assertion as a mode of interpretation at aIl. If it is something of
this sort, then the essential structures of interpretation must recur in it.
The pointing-out which assertion does is performed on the basis of what
has already been disclosed in understanding or discovered circumspectively. Assertion is not a free-floating kind ofbehaviour which, in its own
right, might be capable of disclosing entities in general in a primary way:
on the contrary it always maintains itself on the basis of Being-in-theworld. What we have shown earlierix in relation to knowing the world,
holds just as weIl as assertion. Any assertion requires a fore-having of
whatever has been disclosed; and this is what it points out by way of
giving something a definite character. Furthermore, in any approach
when one gives something a definite character, one is already taking a
look directionally at what is to be put forward in the assertion. When an
entity which has been presented is given a definite character, the function
of giving it such a character is taken over by that with regard to which we
set our sights towards the entity.l Thus any assertion requires a fore-sight;
in this the predicate which we are to assign [zuzuweisende] and make
stand out, gets loosened, so to speak, from its unexpressed inclusion in the
entity itself. To any assertion as a communication which gives something
a definite character there belongs, moreover, an Articulation of what is
pointed out, and this Articulation is in accordance with significations.
Such an assertion will operate with a definite way of conceiving: "The
hammer is heavy", "Heaviness belongs to the hammer", "The hammer
has the property of heaviness". When an assertion is made, sorne foreconception is always implied; but it remains for the most part inconspicuous, because the l~mguage already hides in itself a developed way
of conceiving. Like any interpretation whatever, assertion necessarily has
a fore-having, a fore-sight, and a fore-conception as its existential foundations.
l 'Woraufhin das vorgegebene Seiende anvisiert wird, das übernimmt im Bestimmungsvollzug die Funktion des Bestimmenden.'

157

Being and rime
1. 5
But to what extent does it become a derivative mode of interpretation ?
What has been modified in it? We can point out the modification ifwe
stick to certain limiting cases ofassertion which function in logic as normal
cases and as examples of the 'simplest' assertion-phenomena. Prior to all
analysis, logic has already understood 'logically' what it takes as a theme
under the heading of the "categorical statement"-for instance, 'The
hammer is heavy'. The unexplained presupposition is that the 'meaning'
of this sentence is to be taken as: "This Thing-a hammer-has the
property of heaviness". In concernful circumspection there are no such
assertions 'at first'. But such circumspection has of course its specific ways
of interpreting, and these, as .compared with the 'theoretical judgment'
just mentioned, may take sorne such form as 'The hammer is too heavy',
or rather just 'Too heavy!', 'Hand me the other hammer!' Interpretation
is carried out primordially not in a theoretical statement but in an action
ofcircumspective concern-Iaying aside the unsuitable tool, or exchanging
it, 'without wasting words'. From the fact that words are absent, it may
not be concluded that interpretation is absent. On the other hand,
the kind of interpretation which is circumspectively expressed is not
necessarily already an assertion in the sense we have defined. By what
existential-ontological modifications does assertion arise from circumspective interpretation?
The entity which is held in our fore-having-for instance, the hammer
-is proximally ready-to-hand as equipment. If tms entity becomes the
'object' of an assertion, then as soon as we begin this assertion, there is
already a change-over in the fore-having. Something ready-to-hand with
which we have to do or perform something, turns into something 'about
which' the assertion that points it out is made. Our fore-sight is aimed at
something present-at-hand in what is ready-to-hand. Both by andfor this
way of looking at it [Hin-sicht], the ready-to-hand becomes veiled as
ready-to-hand. Within this discovering of presence-at-hand, which is at
the same time a covering-up of readiness-to-hand, something present-athand which we encounter is given a definite character in its Being-presentat-hand-in-such-and-such-a-manner. Only now are we given any access
to properties or the like. When an assertion has given a definite character
to something present-at-hand, it says something about it as a "what";
and this "what" is drawnfrom that which is present-at-hand as such. The
as-structure of interpretation has undergone a modification. In its function of appropriating what is understood, the 'as' no longer reaches out
into a totality of involvements. As regards its possibilities for Articulating
reference-relations, it has been cut off from that significance which, as
such, constitutes environmentality. The 'as' gets pushed back into the
200

158

1. 5

Being and rime
201
uniform plane of that which is merely present-at-hand. It dwindles to
the structure ofjust letting one seewhat is present-at-hand, and letting one
see it in a definite way. This levelling of the primordial 'as' of circumspective interpretation to the "as" with which presence-at-hand is given
a definite character is the specialty of assertion. Only so does it obtain
the possibility of exhibiting something in such a way that we just
look at it.
Thus assertion cannot disown its ontological origin from an interpretation which understands. The primordial 'as' ofan interpretation (lpfLTJVf.ta)
which understands circumspectively we calI the "existential-hermeneutical
'as' " in distinction from the" apophantical 'as' " of the assertion.
Between the kind of interpretation which is still wholly wrapped up in
concernful understanding and the extreme opposite case of a theoretical
assertion about something present-at-hand, there are many intermediate
gradations: assertions about the happenings in the environment, accounts
of the ready-to-hand, 'reports on the Situation', the recording and fixing of
the 'facts of the case', the description of a state of affairs, the narration
of something that has befallen. We cannot trace back these 'sentences' to
theoretical statements without essentially perverting their meaning. Like
the theoretical statements themselves, they have their 'source' in circumspective interpretation.
With the progress of knowledge about the structure of the ),6yos, it
was inevitable that this phenomenon of the apophantical 'as' should come
into view in sorne form or other. The manner in which it was proximally
seen was not accidentaI, and did not fail to work itselfout in the subsequent
history of logic.
When considered philosophieally, the )'6yos itself is an entity, and,
according to the orientation of ancient ontology, it is something presentat-hand. Words are proximally present-at-hand; that is to say, we come
across themjust as we come across Things; and this holds for any sequence
of words, as that in which the )'6yos expresses itself. In this first search for
the structure of the )'6yos as thus present-at-hand, what was found was
the Being-present-at-hand-together of several words. What establishes the
unity ofthis "together"? As Plato knew, this unity lies in the fact that the
À6yos is always À6yos nv6s. In the À6yos an entity is manifest, and with
a view to this entity, the words are put together in one verbal whole.
Aristotle saw this more radically: every)'6yos is both cnJvOf.UtS and
8tatpf.ut s, not just the one (caU it 'affirmative judgment') or the other
(caU it 'negative judgment'). Rather, every assertion, whether it affirms
or denies, whether it is true or false, is cnJvOf.UtS and litaipf.Œts equiprimordiaUy. To exhibit anything is to take it together and take it apart. It is

159

Being and Time
I. 5
true, of course, that Aristotle did not pursue the analytical question as far
as the problem of which phenomenon within the structure of the '\6yo5' is
the one that permits and indeed obliges us to characterize every statement
as synthesis and diaeresis.
Along with the formaI structures of 'binding' and 'separating'-or,
more precisely, along with the unïty ofthese-we should meet the phenmenon of the 'something as something', and we should meet this as a
phenomenon. In accordance with this structure, something is understood
with regard to something: it is taken together with it, yet in such a way
that this confrontation which understands will at the same time take apart
what has been taken together, and will do so by Articulating it interpretativery. If the phenomenon of the 'as' remains covered up, and, above aIl,
if its existential source in the hermeneutical 'as' is veiled, then Aristotle's
phenomenological approach to the analysis of the '\6yo5' collap$es to a
superficial 'theory ofjudgment', in which judgment becomes the binding
or separating of representations and concepts.
Binding and separating may be formalized still further to a 'relating'.
The judgment gets dissolved logistically into a system in which things are
'co-ordinated' with one another; it becomes the object of a 'calculus';
but it does not become a theme for ontological Interpretation. The possibility and impossibility of getting an analytical understanding of aVv8EUt5'
and atalpEut5'-of the 'relation' in judgment generally-is tightly linked
up with whatever the current status of the ontological problematic and its
principles may be.
How far this problematic has worked its way into the Interpretation of
the '\6yo5', and how far on the other hand the concept of 'judgment' has
(by a remarkable counter-thrust) worked its way into the ontological
problematic, is shown by the phenomenon of the copula. When we consider
this 'bond', it becomes clear that proximally the synthesis-structure is
regarded as self-evident, and that it has also retained the function of
serving as a standard for Interpretation. But if the formaI characteristics
of 'relating' and 'binding' can contribute nothing phenomenally towards
the structural analysis of the '\6yo5' as subject-matter, then in the long run
the phenomenon to which we allude by the term "copula" bas nothing
to do with a bond or binding. The Interpretation of the 'is', whether it be
expressed in its own right in the language or indicated in the verbal
ending, leads us therefore into the context of problems belonging to the
existential analytic, if assertion and the understanding of Being are
existential possibilities for the Being of Dasein itself. When we come to
work out the question of Being (cf. Part l, Division 3),1 we shall thus
202

160

1 This Division has never appeared.

I. 5
Being and Time
203
encounter again this peculiar phenomenon of Being which we meet
within the '\6yo5'.
By demonstrating that assertion is derived from interpretation and
understanding, we have made it plain that the 'logic' of the '\6yo5' is
rooted in the existential analytic of Dasein; and provisionally this has
been sufficient. At the same time, by knowing that the '\6yo5' has been
Interpreted in a way which is ontologically inadequate, we have gained a
sharper insight into the fact that the methodological basis on which ancient
ontology arose was not a primordial one. The '\6yo5' gets experiènccd as
something present-at-hand and Interpreted as such, while at the same
time the entities which it points out have the meaning of presence-athand. This meaning of Being is left undifferentiated and uncontrasted
with other possibilities of Being, so that Being in the sense of a formaI
Being-something becomes fused with it simultaneously, and we are unable
even to obtain a clear-cut division between these two realms.

1f 34. Being-there and Discourse. Language
The fundamental existentialia which constitute the Being of the "there",
the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world, are states-of-mind and understanding. In understanding, there lurks the possibility of interpretationthat is, of appropriating what is understood. In so far as a state-of-mind
is equiprimordial with an act of understanding, it maintains itself in a
certain understanding. Thus there corresponds to it a certain capacity
for getting interpreted. We have seen that assertion is derived from
interpretation, and is an extreme case ofit. In clarifying the third signification of assertion as communication (speaking forth), we were led to the
concepts of "saying" and "speaking", to which we had purposely given
no attention up to that point. The fact that language now becomes our
themefor the first time will indicate that this phenomenon has its roots in
the existential constitution of Dasein's disclosedness. The existentialontological foundation of language is discourse or talk. 1 This phenomenon is
one of which we have been making constant use already in our foregoing
Interpretation of state-of-mind, understanding, interpretation, and assertion; but we have, as it were, kept it suppressed in our thematic analysis.
Discourse is existentialry equiprimordial with state-of-mind and understanding.
The intelligibility of something has always been articulated, even before
there is any appropriative interpretation ofit. Discourse is the Articulation
l 'Retie'. As we have pointed out eariier (see our note 3, p. 47, H. 25 above), we have

~anslated this word either as 'discourse' or 'talk', as the context seems to dernand, sorne-

bmes cornprornising with the hendiadys 'discourse or talk'. But in sorne contexts 'discourse' is too formaI while 'talk' is too colloquial; the reader must rernernber that there is
no good English equivalent for 'Rede'. For a previous discussion see Section 7 B above
(H. 32-34).

161

r62

204

Being and Time
I. 5
of intelligibility. Therefore it underlies both interpretation and assertion. That which can be Articulated in interpretation, and thus even
more primordially in discourse, is what we have called "meaning". That
which gets articulated as such in discursive Articulation, we call the
"totality-of-significations" [Bedeutungsganze]. This can be dissolved or
broken up into significations. Significations, as what has been Articulated
from that which can be Articulated, always carry meaning [... sind ...
sinnhaft]. If discourse, as the Articulation of the intelligibility of the
"there", is a primordial existentiale of disclosedness, and if disclosedness is
primarily constituted by Being-in-the-world, then discourse too must have
essentially a kind of Being which is specifically worldly. The intelligibility
of Being-in-the-world-an intelligibility which goes with a state-of-mind
-expresses itself as discourse. The totality-of-significations of intelligibility
is put into words. To significations, words accrue. But word-Things do not
get supplied with significations.
The way in which discourse gets expressed is language. 1 Language is a
totality of words-a totality in which discourse has a 'worldly' Being of
its own; and as an entity within-the-world, this totality thus becomes
something which we may come across as ready-to-hand. Language can
be broken up into word-Things which are present-at-hand. Discourse is
existentially language, because that entity whose disclosedness it Articulates according to significations, has, as its kind of Being, Being-in-theworld-a Being which has been thrown and submitted to the 'world'.
As an existential state in which Dasein is disclosed, discourse is constitutive for Dasein's existence. Hearing and keeping silent [Schweigen] are
possibilities belonging to discursive speech. In these phenomena the constitutive function of discourse for the existentiality of existence becomes
entirely plain for the first time. But in the first instance the issue is one of
working out the structure of discourse as such.
Discoursing or talking is the way in which we articulate 'significantly'
the intelligibility of Being-in-the-world. Being-with belongs to Beingin-the-world, which in every case maintains itself in sorne definite way
of concernful Being-with-one-another. Such Being-with-one-another is
discursive as assenting or refusing, as demanding or warning, as pronouncing, consulting, or interceding, as 'making assertions', and as
talking in the way of 'giving a talk'. 2 Talking is talk about something.
That which the discourse is about [das Worüber der Rede] does not necessarily or even for the most part serve as the theme for an assertion in

Being and Time
20 5
which one gives something a definite character. Even a command is given
about something; a wish is about something. And so is intercession. What
the ~iscourse is about is a structural item that it necessarily possesses;
for dlScourse helps to constitute the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world,
and in its own structure it is modelled upon this basic state of Dasein.
What is talked about [das Beredete] in talk is always 'talked to' ["angeredet"] in a definite regard and within certain limits. In any talk or
discourse, there is something said-in-the-talk as such [ein Geredetes as
solches]-something said as such [das •.. Gesagte aIs solches] whenever
one wishes, asks, or expresses oneself about something. In this "something
said", discourse communicates.
As we have already indicated in our analysis ofassertion, 1 the phenomenon of communication must be understood in a sense which is ontologically
broad. 'Communication' in which one makes assertions-giving information, for instance-is a special case of that communication which is
grasped in principle existentially. In this more general kind of communication, the Articulation of Being with one another understandingly
is constituted. Through it a co-state-of-mind [Mitbefindlichkeit] gets
'shared', and so does the understanding of Being-with. Communication
is never anything like a conveying of experiences, such as opinions or
wishes, from the interior of one subject into the interior of another.
Dasein-with is already essentially manifest in a co-state-of-mind and a
co-understanding. In discourse Being-with becomes 'explicitly' shared;
that is to say, it is already, but it is unshared as something that has not
been taken hold ofand appropriated. 2
Whenever something is communicated in what is said-in-the-talk, aIl
talk about anything has at the same time the character of expressing itself
[Sichaussprechens]. In talking, Dasein expresses itself [spricht sich ... aus]
not because it has, in the first instance, been encapsulated as something
'internaI' over against something outside, but because as Being-in-theworld it is already 'outside' when it understands. What is expressed is
precisely this Being-outside-that is to say, the way in which one currently
has a state-of-mind (mood), which we have shown to pertain to the full
disclosedness of Being-in. Being-in and its statè-of-mind are made known
in discourse and indicated in language by intonation, modulation, the
tempo of talk, 'the way of speaking'. In 'poetical' discourse, the communication of the existential possibilities of one's state-of-mind can heCOme an aim in itself, and this amounts to a disclosing of existence.

l'Die Hinausgesprochenheit der Rede ist die Sprache.'
und absagen, auffordern, warnen, aIs Aussprache, Rücksprache, Fürsprache, ferner aIs "Aussagen machen" und aIs reden in der Weise des
"Redenhaltens".'

1 Reading '.•• bd der Analyse der Aussage • . .' with the oider editions. The words
'der Aussage' have been omitted in the newer editions..
Il 'Das Mitsein wird in der Rede "ausdrücklich" gerei/t, das heisst es ist schon nur
ungeteilt ais nicht ergriffenes und zugeeignetes.'
'

Il 'Dieses ist redend ais zu-

J. 5

Being and Time
I. 5
In discourse the intelligibility of Being-in-the-world (an intelligibility
which goes with a state-of-mind) is articulated according to significations;
and discourse is this articulation. The items constitutive for discourse
are: what the discourse is about (what is talked about); what is said-inthe-talk, as such; the communication; and the making-knowo. These are
not properties which can just be raked up empirically from language.
They are existential characteristics rooted in the state of Dasein's Being,
and it is they that first make anything like language ontologically possible.
In the factical linguistic form of any definite case of discourse, some of
these items may be lacking, or may remain unnoticed. The fact that they
often do not receive 'verbal' expression, is merely an index ofsorne definite
kind of discourse which, in so far as it is discourse, must in every case lie
within the totality of the structures we have mentioned.
Attempts to grasp the 'essence of language' have always taken their
orientation from one or another of these items; and the clues to their
conceptions of language have been the ideas of 'expression', of 'symbolic
form', of communication as 'assertion', 1 of the 'making-knowo' of experiences, of the 'patterning' of life. Even if one were to put these various
fragmentary definitions together in syncretistic fashion, nothing would be
achieved in the way of a fully adequate definition of "language". We
would still have to do what is decisive here-to work out in advance the
ontologico-existential whole of the structure ofdiscourse on the basis of the
analytic of Dasein.
We can make clear the connection of discourse with understanding and
intelligibility by considering an existential possibility which belongs to
talking itself-hearing. Ifwe have not heard 'aright', it is not by accident
that we say we have not 'understood'. Hearing is constitutive for discourse.
And just as linguistic utterance is based on discourse, so is acoustic
perception on hearing. Listening to . . . is Dasein's existential way of
Being-open as Being-with for Others. Indeed, hearing constitutes the
primary and authentic way in which Dasein is open for its ownmost
potentiality-for-Being-as in hearing the voice of the friend whom every
Dasein carries with it. Dasein hears, because it understands. As a Beingin-the-world with Others, a Being which understands, Dasein is 'in thrall'
to Dasein-with and to itself; and in this thraldom it "belongs" to these. 2
Being-with develops in listening to one another [Aufeinander-hôren],
which can be done in several possible ways: following, 3 going along with,
206

l '0 •• der Mitteilung ais "Aussage" 0 • .' The quotation marks around 'Aussage' appear
only in the newer editionso
2 'Ais verstehendes In-der-Welt-scin mit den Anderen ist es dem Mitdasein und ihm
selbst "hôrig" und in dieser Horigkcit zugehôrig.' In this sentence Heidegger uses sorne
cognates of 'hôren' ('hearing') whosc interrelations disappear in our version.
3 ' ••• des Folgens.
In the earlier cditions therc are quotation marks around 'Foigens'.
0

.'

I. 5
Being and Time
207
and the privative modes of not-hearing, resisting, defying, and turning
away.
It is on the basis of this potentiality for hearing, which is existentially
primary, that anything like hearkening [Horchen] becomes possible. Hearkening is phenomenally still more primordial than what is defined 'in the
first instance' as "hearing" in psychology-the sensing of tones and the
perception ofsounds. Hearkening too has the kind ofBeing of the hearing
which understands. What we 'first' hear is never noises or complexes of
sounds, but the creaking waggon, the motor-cycle. We hear the column
on the march, the north wind, the woodpecker tapping, the fire crackling.
It requires a very artificial and complicated frame of mind to 'hear' a
'pure noise'. The fact that motor-cycles and waggons are what we
proximally hear is the phenomenal evidence that in every case Dasein,
as Being-in-the-world, already dwells alongside what is ready-to-hand
within-the-world; it certainly does not dwell proximally alongside
'sensations'; nor would it first have to give shape to the swirl ofsensations
to provide the springboard from which the subject leaps off and finally
arrives at a 'world'. Dasein, as essentially understanding, is proximally
alongside what is understood.
Likewise, when we are explicitly hearing the discourse of another, we
proximally understand what is said, or-to put it more exactly-we are
already with him, in advance, alongside the entity which the discourse is
about. On the other hand, what we proximally hear is not what is expressed in the utterance. Even in cases where the speech is indistinct or in
a foreign language, what we proximally hear is unintelligible words, and
not a multiplicity oftone-data. l
Admittedly, when what the discourse is about is heard 'naturally', we
can at the same time hear the 'diction', the way in which it is said [die
Weise des Gesagtseins], but only ifthere is sorne co-understanding beforehand of what is said-in-the-talk; for only so is there a possibility of
estimating whether the way in which it is said is appropriate to what the
discourse is about thematically.
In the same way, any answering counter-discourse arises proximally and
directly from understanding what the discourse is about, which is already
'shared' in Being-with.
Only where talking and hearing are existentially possible, can anypne
hearken. The person who 'cannot hear' and 'must fee1'2 may perhaps be
one who is able to hearken very well, and precisely because of this. Just
1 Here we follow the reading of the newer editions: '. . . nicht eine Mannigfaltigkeit
Von Tondaten.' The older editions have 'reine' instead of'eine'.
2 The author is here alluding to the German proverb, 'Wer nicht hôren kann, muss
fùhlen.' (Le. he who cannot heed, must suifer.)

Being and Time
I. 5
hearing something "all around" [Das Nur-herum-horen] is a privation
of the hearing which understands. Both talking and hearing are based
upon understanding. And understanding arises neither through talking
at length [vieles Reden] nor through busily hearing something "all
around". Only he who already understands can listen [zuhoren].
Keeping silent is another essential possibility of discourse, and it has the
same existential foundation. In talking with one another, the person who
keeps silent can 'make one understand' (that is, he can develop an
understanding), and he can do so more authentically than the person
who is never short of words. Speaking at length [Viel-sprechen] about
something does not offer the slightest guarantee that thereby understanding is advanced. On the contrary, talking extensively about something, covers it up and brings what is understood to a sham clarity-the
unintelligibility of the trivial. But to keep silent does not mean to be
dumb. On the contrary, if a man is dumb, he still has a tendency to
'speak'. Such a person has not proved that he can keep silence; indeed,
he entirely lacks the possibility of proving anything of the sort. And the
person who is accustomed by Nature to speak little is no better able to
show that he is keeping silent or that he is the sort of person who can do
so. He who never says anything cannot keep silent at any given moment.
Keeping silent authentically is possible only in genuine discoursing. To be
able to keep silent, Dasein must have something to say-that is, it must
have at its disposaI an authentic and rich disclosedness of itself. In that
case one's reticence [Verschwiegenheit] makes something manifest, and
does away with 'idle talk' ["Gerede"]. As a mode of discoursing, reticence
Articulates the intelligibility ofDasein in so primordial a manner that it
gives cise to a potentiality-for-hearing which is genuine, and to a Beingwith-one-another which is transparent.
Because discourse is constititutive for the Being of the "there" (that is,
for states-of-mind and understanding), while "Dasein" means Being-inthe-world, Dasein as discursive Being-in, has already expressed itself.
Dasein has language. Among the Greeks, their everyday existing was
largely diverted into talking with one another, but at the same time they
'had eyes' to see. Is it an accident that in both their pre-philosophical and
their philosophical ways of interpreting Dasein, they defined the essence
of man as 'etlov '\6yov lxov? The later way of interpreting this definition
of man in the sense of the animal rationale, 'something living which has
reason', is not indeed 'false', but it covers up the phenomenal basis for this
definition of "Dasein". Man shows himself as the entity which talks. This
does not signify that the possibility of vocal utterance is peculiar to him,
but rather that he is the entity which is such as to discover the world and
208

165

I. 5
Being and Time
20 9
Dasein itself. The Greeks had no word for "language"; they understood
this phenomenon 'in the first instance' as discourse. But because the '\6yo,
came into their philosophical ken primarily as assertion, this was the
kind of logos which they took as their clue for working out the basic
structures of the forms of discourse and its components. Grammar sought
its foundations in the 'logic' ofthis logos. But this logic was based upon the
ontology of the present-at-hand. The basic stock of 'categories of signification', which passed over into the subsequent science of language, and
which in principle is still accepted as the standard today, is oriented
towards discourse as assertion. But if on the contrary we take this phenomenon to have in principle the primordiality and breadth of an
existentiale, then there emerges the necessity of re-esta1Jlishing the science
of language on foundations which are ontologically more primordial.
The task of liberating grammar from logic requires beforehand a positive
understanding of the basic a priori structure of discourse in general as an
existentiale. It is not a task that can be carried through later on by improving and rounding out what has been handed down. Bearing this in
mind, we must inquire into the basic forms in which it is possible to
articulate anything understandable, and to do so in accordance with
significations; and this articulation must not be confined to entities
within-the-world which we cognize by considering them theoretically,
and which we express in sentences. A doctrine of signification will not
emerge automatically even ifwe make a comprehensive comparison of as
many languages as possible, and those which are most exotic. To accept,
let us say, the philosophical horizon within whicq. W. von H,umboldt
made language a problem, would be no less inadequate. The doctrine of
signification is rooted in the ontology of Dasein. Whether it prospers or
decays depends on the fate ofthis ontology.x
In the last resort, philosophical research must resolve to ask what kind
of Being goes with language in general. Is it a kind of equipment readyto-hand within-the-world, or has it Dasein's kind of Being, or is it neither
of these? What kind of Being does language have, if there can be such a
thing as a 'dead' language? What do the "rise" and "decline" of a
language mean ontologically? We possess a science of language, and the
Being of the entities which it has for its theme is obscure. Even the horizon
for any investigative question about it is veiled. Is it an accident that
proximally and for the most part significations are 'worldly', sketched out
beforehand by the significance of the world, that they are indeed often
predominantly 'spatial'? Or does this 'fact' have existential-ontological
necessity? and ifit is necessary, why should it be so? Philosophical research
will have to dispense with the 'philosophy of language' if it is to inquire

166

Being and Tim8
I. 5
into 'the 'things themselves' and attain the status of a problematic
which has been cleared up conceptually.
Our Interpretation of language has been designed merely to point out
the ontological 'locus' of this phenomenon in Dasein's state of Being, and
especially to prepare the way for the following analysis, in which, taking
as our clue a fundamental kind of Being belonging to discourse, in
connection with other phenomena, we shall try to bring Dasein's
everydayness into view in a manner which is ontologically more
primordial.

210

167

B. The Everyday Being of the" There", and the Falling of Dasein
In going back to the existential structures ofthe disclosedness ofBeingin-the-world, our Interpretation has, in a way, lost sight of Dasein's
everydayness. In our analysis, we must now regain this phenomenal
horizon which was our thematical starting-point. The question now arises:
what are the existential characteristics of the disclosedness of Being-in-theworld, so far as the latter, as something which is everyday, maintains
itself in the kind of Being of the "they"? Does the "they" have a stateof-mind which is specifie to it, a special way of understanding, talking,
and interpreting? It becomes aIl the more urgent to answer these questions when we remember that proximally and for the most part Dasein
is absorbed in the "they" and is mastered by it. Is' not Dasein, as thrown
Being-in-the-world, thrown proximally right into the publicness of the
"they"? And what does this publicness mean, other than the specifie
disclosedness of the "they"?
If understanding must be conceived primarily as Dasein's potentialityfor-Being, then it is from an analysis of the way of understanding and
interpreting which belongs to the "they" that we must gather which
possibilities of its Being have been disclosed and appropriated by Dasein
as "they". In that case, however, these possibilities themselves make
manifest an essential tendency of Being-one which belongs to everydayness. And finally, when this tendency has been explicated in an ontologically adequate manner, it must unveil a primordial kind ofBeing ofDasein,
in such a way, indeed, that from this kind of Being 1 the phenomenon of
thrownness, to which we have called attention, can be exhibited in its
existential concreteness.
In the first instance what is required is that the disclosedness of the
"they"-that is, the everyday kind of Being of discourse, sight, and
interpretation-should be made visible in certain definite phenomena. In
1 Reading ' .•. von ihr aus .. .'. The earliest editions omit 'aus'; correction is made in
a list of errata.

I. 5

Being and Time
2 11
relation to these phenomena, it may not be superfluous to remark that our
own Interpretation is purely ontological in its aims, and is far removed
from any moralizing critique ofeveryday Dasein, and from the aspirations
of a 'philosophy of culture'.
~ 35. !dIe Talk

The expression 'idle talk' ["Gerede"] is not to be used here in a 'disparaging'l signification. Terminologically, it signifies a positive phenomenon which constitutes the kind of Being of everyday Dasein's understanding and interpreting. For the most part, discourse is expressed by
being spoken out, and has always been so expressed; it is language. 2 But
in that case understanding and interpretation already lie in what has thus
been expressed. In language, as a way things have been expressed or
spoken out [Ausgesprochenheit], there is hidden a wayin which the understanding of Dasein has been interpreted. This way of interpreting it is no
more just present-at-hand than language is; on the contrary, its Being is
itself of the character of Dasein. Proximally, and with certain limits,
Dasein is constantly delivered over to this interpretedness, which controis
and distributes the possibilities of average understanding and of the stateof-mind belonging to it. The way things have been expressed or spoken
out is such that in the totality of contexts of signification into which it has
been articulated, it preserves an understanding of the disclosed world
and therewith, equiprimordially, an understanding of the Dasein-with of
Others and of one's own Being-in. The understanding which has thus
already been "deposited" in the way things have been expressed, pertains
just as much to any traditional discoveredness of entities which may have
been reached, as it does to one's current understanding of Being and to
whatever possibilities and horizons for fresh interpretation and conceptual
Articulation may be available. But now we must go beyond a bare allusion
to the Fact of this interpretedness of Dasein, and must inquire about the
existential kind of Being of that discourse which is expressed and which
expresses itself. If this cannot be conceived as something present-at-hand,
what is its Being, and what does this tell us in principle about Dasein's
everyday kind of Being?
Discourse which expresses itself is communication. Its tendency of
1 These quotation marks are supplied only in the older editions. (It is not easy to translate 'Gerede' in a way which does not carry disparaging connotations. Fortunately
Heidegger makes his meaning quite c l e a r . ) . .
. .
li 'Die Rede spricht sich zumeist aus und hat slch schon Immer ausgesproclien. Sie ISt
Sprache.' As we have pointed out earlier (see our note l, p. 190 H. 149 above), it is often
sufficient to translate 'aussprechen'.as 'express'. In t~e pt;:sent passage, however, t~e connotation of 'speaking out' or 'uttermg' seems especlally Imp~rtant; we shall occaslOnally
make it explicit in our translation by hendiadys or other devlces.

168

il~

169

Being and Time
1. 5
Being is aimed at bringing the hearer to participate in disclosed Being
towards what is talked about in the discourse.
In the language which is spoken when one expresses oneself, there lies an
average intelligibility; and in accordance with this intelligibility the discourse which is communicated can be understood to a considerable extent,
even if the hearer does not bring himself into such a kind of Being towards
what the discourse is about as to have a primordial understanding ofit. We
do not so much understand the entities which are talked about; we aIready
are listening only to what is said-in-the-talk as such. What is said-in-thetalk gets understood; butwhat the talk is about is understood onlyapproximatelyand superficiaIly. We have the same thing in view, because it is in the
same averageness that we have a common understanding of what is said.
Hearing and understanding have attached themselves beforehand to
what is said-in-the-talk as such. The primaryrelationship-of-Being towards
the entity talked about is not 'imparted' by communication;1 but Beingwith-one-another takes place in talking with one another and in concem
with what is said-in-the-talk. To this Being-with-one-another, the fact
that talking is going on is a matter of consequence. la The Being-said, the
dictum, the pronouncement [Ausspruch]-all these now stand surety for the
genuineness of the discourse and of the understanding which belongs to it,
and for its appropriateness to the facts. And because this discoursing has
lost its primary relationship-of-Being towards the entity talked about, or
else has never achieved such a relationship, it does not communicate in
such a way as to let this entity be appropriated in a primordial manner,
but communicates rather by following the route of gossiping and passing
the word along. 3 What is said-in-the-talk as such, spreads in wider circles
and takes on an authoritative character. Things are so becauseone says so.
Idle talk is constituted by just such gossiping and passing the word along
-a process by which its initiallack ofgrounds to stand on [Bodenstandigkeit] becomes aggravated to complete groundlessness [Bodenlosigkeit].
And indeed this idle talk is not confined to vocal gossip, but even spreads
to what we write, where it takes the form of 'scribbling' [das "Geschreibe"]. In this latter case the gossip is not based so much upon hearsay.
It feeds upon superficial reading [dem Angelesenen]. The average understanding of the reader will never be able to decide what has been drawn
from primordial sources with a struggle and how much is just gossip. The
average understanding, moreover, will not want any such distinction,
and does not need it, because, of course, it understands everything.
~ :Die ~tteilung "teilt" nicht d~ prim.iiren SeiJ.ubezug zum beredeten Seienden •. .'
. ~ liegt ~~, dass g~et wud:' We have mterpreted 'Ibm' as referring to 'das
Mit~manderselll, but other Interpretations are grammatically possible.
s •.• sondern auf dem Wege des Weiler- und Nachr.dms.'

.5

Being and Time
213
The groundlessness of idle talk is no obstacle to its becoming public; instead it encourages this. Idle talk is the possibility of understanding everything without previously making the thing one's own. If this were done, idle
talk would founder; and it already guards against such a danger. Idle talk
is something which anyone can rake up; it not only releases one from the
task of genuinely understanding, but develops an undifferentiated kind of
intelligibility, for which nothing is closed off any longer.
Discourse, which belongs to the essential state of Dasein's Being and has a
share in constituting Dasein's disclosedness, has the possibility ofbecoming
idle talk. And when it does so, it serves not so much to keep Being-in-theworld open for us in an articulated understanding, as rather to close it
off, and cover up the entities within-the-world. To do this, one need not
aim to deceive. Idle talk does not have the kind of Being which belongs to
consciously passing off something as something else. The fact that something
has been said groundlessly, and then gets passed along in further retelling,
amounts to perverting the act of disclosing [Erchliessen] into an act of
closing off [Verschliessen]. For what is said is always understood proximally as 'saying' something-that is, an uncovering something. Thus, by
its very nature, idle talk is a closing-off, since to go back to the ground of
what is talked about is something which it leaves undone.
This closing-off is aggravated afresh by the fact that an understanding
of what is talked about is supposedly reached in idle talk. Because of this,
idle talk discourages any new inquiry and any disputation, and in a
peculiar way suppresses them and holds them back.
This way in which things have been interpreted in idle talk has already
established itself in Dasein. There are many things with which we first
become acquainted in this way, and there is not a little which never gets
beyond such an average understanding. This everyday way in which
things have been interpreted is one into which Dasein has grown in the
fust instance, with never a possibility of extrication. In it, out of it, and
against it, aIl genuine understanding, interpreting, and communicating,
aIl re-discovering and appropriating anew, are performed. In no case is a
Dasein, untouched and unseduced by this way in which things have been
interpreted, set before the open country of a 'world-in-itself, so that it just
beholds what it encounters. The dominance of the public way in which
things have been interpreted has already been decisive even for the
possibilities of having a mood-that is, for the basic way in which Dasein
lets the world "matter" to it. 1 The "they" prescribes one's state-of-mind,
and determines what and how one 'sees'.
l '. • • über die Môglichke~ten des Gestimmtseins e~tsc~ieden, das ~~.isst ,ü,ber die
Grundart, in der sich du Dasem von der Welt angehen liisst. The second uber 13 round
only in the later editions.

170

Being and Time
I. 5
Idle talk, which closes things off in the way we have designated, is the
kind of Being which belongs to Dasein's understanding when that understanding has been uprooted. But idle talk does not occur as a condition
which is present-at-hand in something present-at-hand: idle talk has been
uprooted existentially, a~d this uprooting is constant. Ontologically this
means that when Dasein maintains itself in idle talk, it is-as Being-inthe-world--eut off from its primary and primordially genuine relationships-of-Being towards the world, towards Dasein-with, and towards its
very Being-in. Such a Dasein keeps floating unattached [in einer Schwebe] ;
yet in so doing, it is always alongside the world, with Others, and towards
itself. To be uprooted in this manner is a possibility-of-Being only for an
entity whose disclosedness is constituted by discourse as characterized by
understanding and states-of-mind-that is to say, for an entity whose
disclosedness, in such an ontologically constitutive state, is its "there",
its 'in-the-world'. Far from amounting to a "not-Being" of Dasein,
this uprooting is rather Dasein's most everyday and most stubborn
'Reality'.
Yet the obviousness and self-assurance of the average ways in which
things have been interpreted, are such that while the particular Dasein
drifts along towards an ever-increasing groundlessness as it floats, the
uncanniness of this floating remains hidden from it under their protecting
shelter.

2 14

~ 36. Curiosity

In our analysis of understanding and of the disclosedness of the "there"
in general, we havé alluded to the lumen naturale, and designated the disclosedness of Being-in as Dasein's "clearing", in which it first becomes
possible to have something like sight. 1 Our conception of "sight" has been
gained by looking at the basic kind ofdisclosure which is characteristic of
Dasein-namely, understanding, in the sense of the genuine appropriation
of those entities towards which Dasein can comport itself in accordance
with its essential possibilities of Being.
The basic state of sight shows itself in a peculiartendency-of-Being
which belongs to everydayness-the tendency towf1rds 'seeing'. We
designate this tendency by the term "curiosiry" [Neugier], which characteristically is not confined to seeing, but expresses the tendency towards a
peculiar way of letting the world be encountered by us in perception.
Our aim in Interpreting this phenomenon is in principle one which is
existentiai-ontologicai. We do not restrict ourselves to an orientation
towards cognition. Even at an early date (and in Greek philosophy this
1 Sec H. J 33 abovc.

1. 5

Being and Time
215
was no accident) cognition was conceived in terms of the 'desire to see'.!
The treatise which stands first in the collection of Aristotle's treatises on
ontology begins with the sentence: 7Td.VT€S av()pW7TO' TOU €UUva, op'YOVTa,
q,oun. xl The care for seeing is essential to man's Being. 2 This remark
introduces an investigation in which Aristotle seeks to uncover the source
of alllearned exploration of entities and their Being, by deriving it from
that species of Dasein's Being which we have just mentioned. This Greek
Interpretation of the existential genesis of science is not accidentaI. It
brings to explicit understanding what has already been sketched out
beforehand in the principle of Parmenides: TO yap aVro vo€Îv J.urlv T€ Kal
€lva,. 3 Being is that which shows itself in the pure perception
which belongs to beholding, and only by such seeing does Being get discovered. Primordial and genuine truth lies in pure beholding. This thesis
has remained the foundation of western philosophy ever since. The
Hegelian dialectic found in it its motivating conception, and is possible
only on the basis of it.
The remarkable priority of 'seeing' was noticed particularly by Augustine, in connection with his Interpretation of concupiscentia. xU "Ad oculos
enim videre proprie pertinet." ("Seeing belongs properly to the eyes.")
"Utimur autem hoc verbo etiam in ceteris sensibus cum eos ad cognoscendum
intendimus." ("But we even use this word 'seeing' for the other senses when
we devote them to cognizing.") "Neque enim didmus: audi quid rutilet; aut,
olfac quam niteat; aut, gusta quam splendeat; aut, palpa quam fulgeat: videri enim
dicuntur haec omnia." ("For we do not say 'Hear how it glows', or 'Smell
how it glistens', or 'Taste how it shines', or 'Feel how it flashes'; but we
say of each, 'See'; we say that aIl this is seen.") "Dicimus autem non solum,
vide quid luceat, quod soli oculi sentire possunt." ("We not only say, 'See how
that shines', when the eyes alone can perceive it;") "sed etiam, vide quid
sonet; vide quid oleat; vide quid sapiat; vide quam durum sit;" ("but we even
say, 'See how that sounds', 'See how that is scented', 'See how that tastes',
'See how hard that is'.") "Ideoque generalis experientia sensuum concupiscentia
sicut dictum est oculorum vocatur, quia videndi oJficium in quo primatum oculi
tenent, etiam ceteri sensus sibi de similitudine usurpant, cum aliquid cognitionis
explorant." ("Therefore the experience of the senses in general is designated
1'••. nicht in der verengten Orientierung am Erkennen, das schon früh und in der
griechischen Philosophie nicht zufàllig aus der "Lust zu sehen" begriffen wird.' The
earlier editions have'... am Erkennen, aIs welches schon früh .. .'
2 While the sentence from Aristotle is usually translated, 'Ali men by nature desire to
know', Heidegger takes .lll'va, in its root meaning, 'to see', and connects op'yovra.
(literally: 'reach out for') with 'Sorge' ('care').
a This sentence has been variously interpreted. The most usual version is: 'For thinking
and being are the same.' Heidegger, however, goes back to the original meaning of vO"v
as 'to perceive with the eyes'.

Being and Time
I. 5
as he 'lust of the eyes'; for when the issue is one ofknowing something,
the other senses, by a certain resemblance, take to themselves the function
of seeing-a function in which the eyes have priority.")
What is to be said about this tendency just to perceive? Which existential state ofDasein will become intelligible in the phenomenon ofcuriosity?
Being-in-the-world is proximally absorbed in the world of concem.
This concem is guided by circumspection, which discovers the ready-tohand and preserves it as thus disçovered. Whenever we have something
to contribute or perform, circumspection gives us the route for proceeding
with it, the means ofcarrying it out, the right opportunity, the appropriate
moment. Concem may come to rest in the sense of one's interrupting the
performance and taking a rest, or it can do so by getting it finished. In rest,
concem does not disappear; circumspection, however, becomes free and
is no longer bound to the world of work. When we take a rest, care subsides into circumspection which has been set free. In the world of work,
circumspective discovering has de-severing as the character of its Being.
When circumspection has been set free, there is no longer anything readyto-hand which we must concem ourselves with bringing close. But, as
essentially de-severant, this circumspection provides itself with new
possibilities of de-severing. This means that it tends away from what is
most closely ready-to-hand, and into a far and alien world. Care becomes
concem with the possibilities of seeing the 'world' merely as it looks while
one tarries and takes a rest. Dasein seeks what is far away simply in order
to bring it close to itself in the way it looks. Dasein lets itself be carried
along [mitnehmen] solely by the looks of the world; in this kind ofBeing,
it concerns itself with becoming rid of itself as Being-in-the-world and rid
ofits Being alongside that which, in the closest everyday manner, is readyto-hand.
When curiosity has become free, however, it concerns itselfwith seeing,
not in order to understand what is seen (that is, to come into a Being
towards it) butjust in order to see. It seeks novelty only in order to leap
from it anew to another novelty. In this kind of seeing, that which is an
issue for care does not lie in grasping something and being knowingly in
the truth; it lies rather in its possibilities ofabandoning itself to the world.
Therefore curiosity is characterized by a specific way of not tarrying alongside what is closest. Consequendy it does not seek the leisure of tarrying
observantly, but rather seeks restlessness and the excitement of continuaI
novelty and changing encounters: ln not tarrying, curiosity is concemed
with the constant possibility of distraction. Curiosity has nothing to do with
observing entities and marvelling at them-8avJL&~E'V. To be amazed to
the point of not understanding is something in which it has no interest.

216

1 72

21 7
1.5
Being and Time
Rather it concerns itselfwith a kind ofknowing, butjust in order to have
known. Both this not tarrying in the environment with which one concems
onese1f, and this distraction by new possihilities, are constitutive items for
curiosity; and upon these is founded the third essential characteristic of
this phenomenon, which we call the character of "never dwelling al1)lwhere"
[Aujenthaltslosigkeit]. Curiosity is everywhere and nowhere. This mode of
Being-in-the-world reveals a new kind of Being of everyday Dasein-a
kind in ~hich Dasein is constantly uprooting itse1f.
Idle talk controls even the ways in which one may be curious. It says
what one "must" have read and seen. In being everywhere and nowhere,
curiosity is de1ivered over to idle talk. These two everyday modes of
Being for discourse and sight are not just present-at-hand side by side in
their tendency to uproot, but either of these ways-to-be drags the other one
with it. Curiosity, for which nothing is closed off, and idle talk, for which
there is nothing that is not understood, provide themse1ves (that is, the
Dasein which is in this manner [dem so seienden Dasein]) with the guarantee of a 'life' which, supposedly, is genuine1y 'live1y'. But with this
supposition a third phenomenon now shows itse1f, by which the disclosedness of everyday Dasein is characterized.

~ 37. Ambiguiry

When, in our everyday Being-with-one-another, we encounter the sort
of thing which is accessible to everyone, and about which anyone can
say anything, it soon becomes impossible to decide what is disclosed in a
genuine understanding, and what is not. This ambiguity [Zweideutigkeit]
extends not only to the world, butjust as much to Being-with-one-another
as such, and even to Dasein's Being towards itse1f.
Everything looks as if it were genuine1y understood, genuine1y taken
hold of, genuine1y spoken, though at bottom it is not; or else it does not
look so, and yet at bottom it is. Ambiguity not only affects the way we
avail ourse1ves of what is accessible for use and enjoyment, and the way
we manage it; ambiguity has already established itse1f in the understanding as a potentiality-for-Being, and in the way Dasein projects itself
and presents itse1f with possibilities. 1 Everyone is acquainted with what
is up for discussion and what occurs,2 and everyone discusses it; but
everyone also knows already how to talk about what has to happen firstabout what is not yet up for discussion but 'really' must be done. Already
everyone has surmised and scented out in advance what Others have also
surmised and scented out. This Being-on-the scent is of course based upon
l '••• sondem sie hat sich schon im Verstehen ais Seinkonnen, in der Art des Entwurfs
und der Vorgabe von Moglichkeiten des Daseins festgesetzt.·
li ' ••• was vorliegt und vorkommt ....

173

Being and Time
1. 5
hearsay, for if anyone is genuinely 'on the scent' of anything, he does not
speak about it; and this is the most entangling way in which ambiguity
presents Dasein's possibilities so that they will already be stifled in their
power. 1
Even supposing that what "they" have surmised and scented out should
some day be actually translated into deeds, ambiguity has already taken
174 care that interest in what has been Realised will promptly die away. Indeed
this interest persists, in a kind of curiosity and idle talk, only so long as
there is a possibility of a non-committal just-surmising-with-someone-else.
Being "in on it" with someone [das Mit-dabei-sein] when one is on the
scent, and so long as one is on it, precludes one's allegiance when what
has been surmised gets carried out. For in such a case Dasein is in every
case forced back on itself. Idle talk and curiosity lose their power, and are
already exacting their penalty. 2 When confronted with the carryingthrough of what "they" have surmised together, idle talk readily establishes that "they" "could have done that too"-for "they" have indeed
surmised it together. In the end, idle talk is even indignant that what it
has surmised and constantly demanded now actually happens. In that case,
indeed, the opportunity to keep on surmising has been snatched away..
But when Dasein goes in for something in the reticence of carrying it
through or even of genuinely breaking down on it, its time is a different
time and, as seen by the public, an essentially slower time than that of
idle talk, which 'lives at a faster rate'. Idle talk will thus long since have
gone on to something else which is currently the very newest thing. That
which was earlier surmise and has now been carried through, has come too
late if one looks at that which is newest. Idle talk and curiosity take care
in their ambiguity to ensure that what is genuinely and newly created is
out of date as soon as it emerges before the public. Such a new creation
can become free in its positive possibilities only ifthe idle talk which covers
it up has become ineffective, and if the 'common' interest has died away.
I~ the ambi~ty of the way things have been publicly interpreted,
talkmg about thmgs ahead of the game and making surmises about them
curiously, gets passed off as what is really happening, while taking action
and carrying something through get stamped as something merely subsequent and ~nimportant. Thus Dasein's understanding in the "they" is
constantly gomg wrong [versieht sich] in its projects, as regards the genuine
~ossibilities ~fB~ing. Dasein is always ambiguously 'there'-that is to say,
m that pubhc dlsclosedness of Being-with-one-another where the loudest
218

1': .. ist di~ verfangliehst~ 'Yeise, in der die Zweideutigkeit Moglichkeiten des Daseins

vorgI~t, ~ Sl~ auch schon m Ihrer Kraft zu ersticken.' (Notice that 'ihrer' may refer to

'Zweldeutigkelt' or to 'Moglichkeiten'.)
Il 'Und sie riichen sich auch schon.'

21 9
I. 5
Being and Time
idle talk and the most ingenious curiosity keep 'things moving', where, in
an everyday manner, everything (and at bottom nothing) is happening.
This ambiguity is always tossing to curiosity that which it seeks; and
it gives idle talk the semblance of having everything decided in it.
But this kind of Being of the disclosedness of Being-in-the-world
dominates also Being-with-one-another as such. The Other is proximally
'there' in terms of what "they" have heard about him, what "they" say
in their talk about him, and what "they" know about him. Into primordial Being-with-one-another, idle talk first slips itself in between.
Everyone keeps his eye on the Other first and next, watching how he will
comport himself and what he will say in reply. Being-with-one-another
in the "they" is by no means an indifferent side-by-side-ness in which
everything has been settled, but rather an intent, ambiguous watching of
one another, a secret and reciprocal listening-in. Under the mask of
"for-one-another", an "against-one-another" is in play.
ln this connection, we must notice that ambiguity does not first arise
from aiming explicitly at disguise or distortion, and that it is not something which the individual Dasein first conjures up. It is already implied
in Being with one another, as thrown Being-with-one-another in a world.
Publicly, however, it is quite hidden; and "they" will always defend themselves against this Interpretation of the kind ofBeing which belongs to the
way things have been interpreted by the "they", lest it should prove
correct. It would be a misunderstanding if we were to seek to have the
explication of these phenomena confirmed by looking to the "they" for
agreement.
The phenomena of idle talk, curiosity, and ambiguity have been set
forth in such a manner as to indicate that they are aIready interconnected
in their Being. We must now grasp in an existential-ontological manner
the kind of Being which belongs to this interconnection. The basic kind
of Being which belongs to everydayness is to be understood within the
horizon of those structures of Dasein's Being which have been hitherto
obtained.

, 38. Falling and Thrownness
Idle talk, curiosity and ambiguity characterize the way in which, in
an everyday manner, Dasein is its 'there'-the disclosedness of Being-inthe-world. As definite existential characteristics, these are not present-athand in Dasein, but help to make up its Being. In these, and in the way
they are interconnected in their Being, there is revealed a basic kind of
Being which belongs to everydayness; we calI this the ''falling''l ofDasein.
l 'Verfollen'. See our note 2, p. 42, H. 21 abovc, and note l, p. 172, H. 134 above.

175

Being and Time
I. 5
This term does not express any negative evaluation, but is used to signify
that Dasein is proximally and for the most part alongside the 'world' of its
concern. This "absorption in ..." [Aufgehen bei ...] has mostly the
character of Being-Iost in the publicness of the "they". Dasein has, in the
first instance, fallen away [abgefallen] from itself as an authentic potentiality for Being its Self, and has fallen into the 'world'.l "Fallenness"
into the 'world' means an absorption in Being-with-one-another, in so far
as the latter is guided by idle talk, curiosity, and ambiguity. Through the
Interpretation of falling, what we have called the "inauthenticity" of
Daseinx1i1 may now be defined more precisely. On no account, however,
do the terms "inauthentic" and "non-authentic" signify 'really not', 2 as
if in this mode of Being, Dasein were altogether to lose its Being. "Inauthenticity" does not mean anything like Being-no-Ionger-in-the-world,
but amounts rather to a quite distinctive kind of Being-in-the-world-the
kind which is completely fascinated by the 'world' and by the Daseinwith of Others in the "they". Not-Being-its-self [Das Nicht-es-selbst-sein]
functions as a positive possibility of that entity which, in its essential concern, is absorbed in a world. This kind of not-Eeing has to be conceived as
that kind of Being which is closest to Dasein and in which Dasein maintains itself for the most part.
80 neither must we take the fallenness of Dasein as a 'fall' from apurer
and higher 'primaI status'. Not only do we lack any experience of this
ontically, but ontologically we lack any possibilities or clues for Interpreting it.
I.n fa.lling, Dasein itself as factical Being-in-the-world, is somethingfrom
wh~ch ~t has already fallen away. And it has not fallen into sorne entity
WhlCh l~ co~es upon for the first time in the course of its Being, or even
one WhlCh It has not come upon at aIl; it has fallen into the world. which
itself belongs to its Being. Falling is a definite existential chara~teristic
ofDasein itself. It makes no assertion about Dasein as something presentat-hand, or about present-at-hand relations to entities from which Dasein
'is descended' or with which Dasein has subsequently wound up in sorne
sort of commercium.
We would also misunderstand the ontologico-existential structure of
falling 3 if we were to ascribe to it the sense of a bad and deplorable
ontical property of which, perhaps, more advanced stages of human
culture might be able to rid themselves.
220

l ' ..' • und an die "~elt" verfallen.' While we shall follow English idioms by translating
'an die "Welt" , as 'lOto t~e "~orld" , in contexts such as this, the preposition 'into' is
h~~ly the corr,,:ct on,e. Th~ Idea IS rather that offalling al the world or collapsing against it.
Un- und mchtelgenthch, bedeutet aber keineswegs "eigentlich nicht"
,
3 'Die ontolo~ch.existenzialeStruktur des Verfallens •. .' The words 'd~ Verfallens'
do not appear 10 the earlier editions.

J. 5

Being and Time
221
Neither in our first allusion to Being-in-the-world as Dasein's basic
state, nor in our characterization of its constitutive structural items, did
we go beyond an analysis of the constitution of this kind of Being and take
note ofits character as a phenomenon. We have indeed described concern
and solicitude, as the possible basic kinds of Being-in. But we did not
discuss the question of the everyday kind of Being of these ways in which
one may be. We also showed that Being-in is something quite different
from a mere confrontation, whether by way of observation or by way of
action; that is, it is not the Being-present-at-hand-together of a subject
and an Object. Nevertheless, it must still have seemed that Being-in-theworld has the function of a rigid framework, within which Dasein's
possible ways of comporting itself towards its world run their course
without touching the 'framework' itself as regards its Being. But this
supposed 'framework' itself helps make up the kind of Being which is
Dasein's. An existential mode of Being-in-the-world is documented in the
phenomenon of falling.
Jdle talk discloses to Dasein a Being towards its world, towards Others,
and towards itself-a Being in which these are understood, but in a mode
of groundless floating. Curiosity discloses everything and anything, yet in
such a way that Being-in is everywhere and nowhere. Ambiguity hides
nothing from Dasein's understanding, but only in order that Being-inthe-world should be suppressed in this uprooted "everywhere and
nowhere".
By elucidating ontologically the kind of Being belonging to everyday
Being-in-the-world as it shows through in these phenomena, we first
arrive at an existentially adequate determination of Dasein's basic state.
Which is the structure that shows us the 'movement' of falling?
Idle talk and the way things have been publicly interpreted (which idle
talk includes) constitute theIUSelves in Being-with-one-another. Idle talk
is not something present-at-hand for itself within the world, as a product
detached from Being-with-one-another. And it is just as far from letting
itself be volatilized to something 'universal' which, because it belongs
essentially to nobody, is 'really' nothing and occurs as 'Real' only in the
individual Dasein which speaks. Idle talk is the kind ofBeing that belongs
ta Being-with-one-another itself; it does not first arise through certain
circumstances which have effects upon Dasein 'from outside'. But if
Dasein itself, in idle talk and in the way things have been publicly interpreted, presents to itself the possibility of losing itself in the "they" and
falling into groundlessness, this tells us that Dasein prepares for itself a
constant temptation towards falling. Being-in-the-world is in itself
tempting [versucherisch].

Being and Time
I. 5
Since the way in which things have been publicly interpreted has
already become a temptation to itself in this manner, it holds Dasein fast
in its fallenness. Idle talk and ambiguity, having seen everything, having
understood everything, develop the supposition that Dasein's disclosedness, which is so available and so prevalent, can guarantee to Dasein that
all the possibilities of its Being will be secure, genuine, and full. Through
the self-certainty and decidedness of the "they", it gets spread abroad
increasingly that there is no need of authentic understanding or the stateof-mind that goes with it. The supposition of the "they" that one is
leading and sustaining a full and genuine 'life', brings Dasein a tranquillity,
for which everything is 'in the best of order' and all doors are open.
Falling Being-in-the-world, which tempts itself, is at the same time
tranquillizing [beruhigend].
However, this tranquillity in inauthentic Being does not seduce one
into stagnation and inactivity, but drives one into uninhibited 'hustle'
["Betriebs"]. Being-fallen into the 'world' does not now somehow
come to rest. The tempting tranquillization aggravates the falling. With
special regard to the interpretation of Dasein, the opinion may now arise
that understanding the most alien cultures and 'synthesizing' them with
one's own may lead to Dasein's becoming for the first time thoroughly
and genuinely enlightened about itself. Versatile curiosity and restlessly
"knowing it all" masquerade as a universal understanding of Dasein. But
at bottom it remains indefinite what is really to be understood, and the
question has not even been asked. Nor has it been understood that understanding itselfis a potentiality-for-Being which must be made free in one's
ownmost Dasein alone. When Dasein, tranquillized, and 'understanding'
everything, thus compares itself with everything, it drifts along towards
an alienation [Entfremdung] in which its ownmost potentiality-for-Being
is hidden from it. Falling Being-in-the-world is not only tempting and
tranquillizing; it is at the same time alienating.
Yet this alienation cannot mean that Dasein gets factically tom away
from itself. On the contrary, this alienation drives it into a kind of Being
which borders on the most exaggerated 'self-dissection', tempting itself
with all possibiIities of explanation, so that the very 'characterologies'
and 'typologies' which it has brought aboutI are themselves already
becoming something that cannot be surveyed at a glance. This alienation
closes off from Dasein its authenticity and possibility, even if only the
possibility of genuinely foundering. It does not, however, surrender
Dasein to an entity which Dasein itself is not, but forces it into its

I. 5
Being and Time
223
inauthenticity-into a possible kind of Being of itselj. The alienation of
falling-atonce tempting and tranquillizing-Ieads by its own movement,
to Dasein's getting entangled [verfiingt] in itself.
The phenomena we have pointed out-temptation, tranquillizing,
alienation and self-entangling (entanglement)-characterize the specifie
kind of Being which belongs to falling. This 'movement' of Dasein in its
own Being, we calI its "downward plunge" [Absturz]. Dasein plunges out
of itself into itself, into the groundlessness and nullity of inauthentic
everydayness. But this plunge remains hidden from Dasein by 'the way
things have been publicly interpreted, so much so, indeed, that it gets
interpreted as a way of 'ascending' and 'living eoncretely'.
This downward plunge into and within the groundlessness of the inauthentic Being of the "they", has a kind of motion which eonstantly
tears the understanding away from the projeeting of authentie possibilities, and into the tranquillized supposition that it possesses everything,
or that everything is within its reach. Sinee the understanding is thus
eonstantly tom away from authenticity and into the "they" (though
always with a sham of authenticity), the movement of falling is charaeterized by turbulence [Wirbel].
Falling is not only existentially determinative for Being-in-the-world.
At the same time turbulence makes manifest that the thrownness which
can obtrude itself upon Dasein in its state-of-mind, has the charaeter of
throwing and of movement. Thrownness is neither a 'faet that is finished'
nor a Fact that is settled. I Dasein's faeticity is such that as long as it is
what it is, Dasein remains in the throw, and is sucked into the turbulence
of the "they's" inauthenticity. Thrownness, in which facticity lets itself
be seen phenomenally, belongs to Dasein, for which, in its Being, that very
Being is an issue. Dasein exists factically.
But now that falling has been exhibited, have we not set forth a phenomenon which speaks directly against the definition we have used in
indieating the formaI idea of existence? Can Dasein be conceived as an
entity for which, in its Being, its potentiality-for-Being is an issue, if this
entity, in its very everydayness, has lost itself, and, in falling, 'lives' away
Jrom itseif? But falling into the world would be phenomenal 'evidence'
against the existentiality of Dasein only if Dasein were regarded as an
isolated "1" or subject, as a self-point from which it moves away. In that
case, the world would be an abject. Falling intothe world would then
have to be re-Interpreted ontologically as Being-present-at-hand in the
manner of an entity within-the-world. If, however, we keep in mind

l '••. die v?~ ihr geze~tigten.•. .' V!e follow the diflû;ilior lectio of the earlier editions.
The newer editions have ••. die von ihr gezeigten •• .' ('•.. which it has shown • • .').
See H. 304 below, and our note ad loc.

l'Die Geworfenheit ist nicht nur nieht eine "fertige Tatsache", sondem auch nicht ein
abgeschlossenes Faktum.·

222

179

Being and Time
I. 5
that Dasein's Being is in the state of Being-in-the-world, as we have already
pointed out, then it becomes manifest that falling, as a kind of Being of this
Being-in, affords us rather the most elemental evidencefor Dasein's existentiality. In falling, nothing other than our potentiality-for-Being-in
world is the issue, even if in the mode of inauthenticity. Dasein can faIl
only because Being-in-the-world understandingly with a state-of-mind
is an issue for it. On the other hand, authentic existence is not something
which floats above faIling everydayness; existentiaIly, it is only a modified
way in which such everydayness is seized upon.
The phenomenon of falling does not give us something like a 'night
view' of Dasein, a property which occurs ontically and may serve to
round out the innocuous aspects of this entity. Falling reveals an essential
ontological structure of Dasein itself. Far from determining its nocturnal
side, it constitutes aIl Dasein's days in their everydayness.
It follows that our existential-ontological Interpretation makes no
ontical assertion about the 'corruption ofhuman Nature', not because the
necessary evidence is lacking, but because the problematic of this Interpretation is prior to any assertion about corruption or incorruption.
Falling is conceived ontologically as a kind of motion. Ontically, we have
not decided whether man is 'drunk with sin' and in the status corruptionis,
whether he walks in the status integritatis, or whether he finds himself in
an intermediate stage, the status gratiae. But in so far as any faith or
'world view', makes any such assertions, and if it asserts anything about
Dasein as Being-in-the-world, it must come back to the existential
structures which we have set forth, provided that its assertions are to make
a daim to conceptual understanding.
The leading question of this chapter has been about the Being of the
"there". Our theme has been the ontological Constitution of the disdosedness which essentiaIly belongs to Dasein. The Being of that disdosedness is constituted by states-of-mind, understanding, and discourse. 115
everyday kind of Being is characterized by idle talk, curiosity, and
ambiguity. These show us the movement of falling, with temptation,
tranquillizing, alienation, and entanglement as its essential characteristics.
But with this analysis, the whole existential constitution of Dasein has
been laid bare in its principal features, and we have obtained the phenomenal ground for a 'comprehensive' Interpretation of Dasein's Being
as care.
224

180

VI
CARE AS THE BEING OF DASEIN
~ 39. The Question of the Primordial Totality of Dasein's Structural Whole

BEING-IN-THE-WORLD is a structure which is primordially and constandy whole. In the preceding chapters (Division One, Chapters 2-5)
this structure has been elucidated phenomenally as a whole, and also in its
constitutive items, though always on this basis. The preliminary glance
which we gave to the whole of this phenomenon in the beginning1 has
now lost the emptiness of our first general sketch of it. To be sure, the
constitution of the structural whole and its everyday kind of Being, is
phenomenaIly so manifold that it can easily obstruct our looking at the
whole as such phenomenologically in a way which is unijied. But we may
look at it more freely and our unified view of it may be held in readiness
more securely if we now raise the question towards which we have been
working in our preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein in general:
"how is the totality of that structural whole which we have pointed out to be defined
in an existential-ontological manner?"
Dasein exists factically. We shall inquire whether existentiality and
facticity have an ontological unity, or whether facticity belongs essentially
to existentiality. Because Dasein essentiaIly has a state-of-mind belonging
to it, Dasein has a kind of Being in which it is brought before itself and
becomes disdosed to itself in its thrownness. But thrownness, as a kind of
Being, belongs to an entity which in each case is its possibilities, and is
them in such a way that it understands itself in these possibilities and in
terms of them, projecting itself upon them. Being alongside the ready-tohand, belongs just as primordially to Being-in-the-world as does Beingwith Others; and Being-in-the-world is in each case for the sake of
itself. The Self, however, is proximally and for the most part inauthentic,
the they-self. Being-in-the-world is always fallen. Accordingly Dasein's
"average everydayness" can be defined as "Being-in-the-world which is falling
and disclosed, thrown andprojecting, andfor which its ownmost potentiality-for-Being
is an issue, both in its Being alongsirle the 'world' and in its Being-with Otkers".
H

181

Being and Time
I. 6
Can we succeed in grasping this structural whole of Dasein's everydayness in its totality? Can Dasein's Being be brought out in such a
unitary manner that in terms of it the essential equiprimordiality of the
structures we have pointed out, as weIl as their existential possibilities of
modification, will become intelligible? Does our present approach via
the existential analytic provide us an avenue for arriving at this Being
phenomenally?
To put it negatively, it is beyond question that the totality of the
structural whole is not to be reached by building it up out of elements.
For this we would need an architect's plan. The Being of Dasein, upon
which the structural whole as such is ontologically supported, becomes
accessible to us when we look all the way through this whole to a single
primordially unitary phenomenon which is already in this whole in such
a way that it provides the ontological foundation for each structural item
in its structural possibility. Thus we cannot Interpret this 'comprehensively' by a process of gathering up what we have hitherto gained and
taking it aIl together. The question of Dasein's basic existenûal character
is essentially different from that of the Being of something present-athand. Our everyday environmental experiencing [Erfahren], which
remains directed both ontically and ontologically towards entities withinthe-world, is not the sort of thing which can present Dasein in an ontically
primordial manner for ontological analysis. Similarly our immanent perception of Experiences [Erlebnissen] fails to provide a clue which is
ontologically adequate. On the other hand, Dasein's Being is not be to
deduced from an idea ofman. Does the Interpretation ofDasein which we
have hitherto given permit us to infer what Dasein,jrom its own standpoint,
demands as the only appropriate ontico-ontological way of access to itself?
An understanding of Being belongs to Dasein's ontological structure.
As something that is [Seiend], it is disclosed to itself in its Being. The
kind of Being which belongs to this disclosedness is constituted by stateof-mind and understanding. Is there in Dasein an understanding stateof-mind in which Dasein has been disclosed to itself in sorne distinctive
way?
If the existential analytic of Dasein is to retain clarity in principle as to
its function in fundamental ontology, then in order to master its provisional task of exhibiting Dasein's Being, it must seek for one of the mostjarreaching and most primordial possibilities of disclosur~ne that lies in
Dasein itself. The way of disclosure in which Dasein brings itself before
itself must be such that in it Dasein becomes accessible as simplified in a
certain manner. With what is thus disclosed, the structural totality of the
Being we seek must then come to light in an elemental way.
226

182

1.6
Being and Time
227
As a state-of-mind which will satisfy these methodological requirements,
the phenemonon of anxieryl will be made basic for our analysis. In working
out this basic state-of-mind and characterizing ontologically what is disclosed in it as such, we shall take the phenomenon of falling as our point
of departure, and distinguish anxiety from the kindred phenomenon of
fear, which we have analysed earlier. As one of Dasein's possibilities of
Being, anxiety-together with Dasein itself as disclosed in it-provides
the phenomenal basis for explicitly grasping Dasein's primordial totality
of Being. Dasein's Being reveals itself as care. If we are to work out this
basic existential phenomenon, we must distinguish it from phenomena
which might be proximally identified with care, such as will, wish,
addiction, and urge. 2 Care cannot be derived from these, since they
themselves are founded upon it.
Like every ontological analysis, the ontological Interpretation of Dasein
as care, with whatever we may gain from such an Interpret<1.tion, lies far
from what is accessible to the pre-ontological understanding of Being or
even to our ontical acquaintance with entities. It is not surprising that
when the common understanding has regard to that with which it has
only ontical familiarity, that which is known ontologically seems rather
strange to it. In spite of this, even the ontical approach with which we
have tried to Interpret Dasein ontologically as care, may appear farfetched and theoretically contrived, to say nothing of the act of violence
one might discern in our setting aside the confirmed traditional definition
of "man". Accordingly our existential Interpretation of Dasein as care
requires pre-ontological confirmation. This lies in demonstrating that no
sooner has Dasein expressed anything about itself to itself, than it has
already interpreted itself as care (cura), even though it has done so only
pre-ontologically.
The analytic of Dasein, which is proceeding towards the phenomenon of
care, is to prepare the way for the problematic offundamental ontologythe question of the meaning of Being in general. In order that we may turn our
glance explicitly upon this in the light of what we have gained, and go
beyond the special task of an existentially a priori anthropology, we must
look back and get a more penetrating grasp of the phenomena which are
most intimate1y connected with our leading question-the question of
Being. These phenomena are those very ways ofBeing which we have heen
hitherto explaining: readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand, as attributes
l'Angst'. While this word has generally been translated as 'anxiety' in the postFreudian psychologicalliterature, it appears as 'dread' in the translations of Kierkegaard
and in a number of discussions of Heidegger. In sorne ways 'uneasiness' or 'malaise' would
he more appropriate still.
.
2
Wille, Wunsch, Hang und Drang.' For further discussion see H. 194 If. be1ow•.'
'0

0

•

18 3

184

228
Being and Time
I. 6
ofentities within-the-world whose character is not that ofDasein. Because
the ontological problematic of Being has heretofore been understood
primarily in the sense of presence-at-hand ('Reality', 'world-actuality'),
while the nature of Dasein's Being has remained ontologically undetermined, we need to discuss the ontological interconnections of care, worldhood, readiness-to-hand, and presence-at-hand (Reality). This willlead
to a more precise characterization of the concept of Reality in the context
ofa discussion of the epistemological questions oriented by this idea which
have been raised in realism and idealism.
Entities are, quite independently of the experience by which they are
disclosed, the acquaintance in which they are discovered, and the grasping
in which their nature is ascertained. But Being 'is' only in the understanding of those entities to whose Being something like an understanding
of Being be1ongs. Hence Being can be something unconceptualized, but
it never complete1y fails to be understood. In ontological problematics
Being and truth have, from time immemorial, been brought together if not
entire1y identified. This is evidence that there is a necessary connecton
between Being and understanding, even if it may perhaps be hidden in its
primordial grounds. If we are to give an adequate preparàtion for the
question of Being, the phenomenon of truth must be ontologically elarified.
This will be accomplished in the first instance on the basis of what we
have gained in our foregoing Interpretation, in connection with the phenomena of disclosedness and discoveredness, interpretation and assertion.
Thus our preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein will conclude
with the following themes: the basic state-of-mind of anxiety as a distinctive way in which Dasein is disclosed (Section 40) ; Dasein's Being as care
(Section 41); the confirmation of the existential Interpretation of Dasein
as care in terms of Dasein's pre-ontological way of interpreting itself
(Section 42); Dasein, worldhood, and Reality (Section 43); Dasein, disclosedness, and truth (Section 44).
~ 40. The Basic State-of-mind of Anxiety as a Distinctive Way in which Dasein

is Disclosed
One of Dasein's possibilities of Being is to give us ontical 'information'
about Dasein itself as an entity. Such information is possible only in that
diselosedness which belongs to Dasein and which is grounded in state-ofmind and understanding. How far is anxiety a state-of-mind which is
distinctive? How is it that in anxiety Dasein gets brought before itse1f
through its own Being, so that we can define phenomenologically the
character of the entity diselosed in anxiety, and define it as such in its
Being, or make adequate preparations for doing so?

1. 6
Being and Time
229
Since our aim is to proceed towards the Being of the totality of the
structural whole, we shall take as our point of departure the concrete
analyses offalling which we have just carried through. Dasein's absorption
in the "they" and its absorption in the 'world' of its concern, make
manifest something like ajleeing of Dasein in the face of itself-ofitself as
an authentic potentiality-for-Being-its-Self.1 This phenomenon of Dasein's
Beeing in the face of itself and in the face of its authenticity, seems at least
a suitable phenomenal basis for the following investigation. But to bring
itselfface to face with itself, is precisely what Dasein does not do when it thus
Bees. It turns awayfrom itselfin accordance with its ownmost inertia [Zug]
offalling. In investigating such phenomena, however, we must be careful not
to confuse ontico-existentiell characterization with ontologico-existential
Interpretation nor may we overlook the positive phenomenal bases provided for this Interpretation by such a characterization.
From an existentiell point of view, the authenticity of Being-one's-Self
has of course been closed off and thrust aside in falling; but to be thus
closed off is merely the privation of a diselosedness which manifests itself
phenomenally in the fact that Dasein's Beeing is a Beeing in the face of
itself. That in the face ofwhich Dasein Hees, is precisely what Dasein cornes
up 'behind'. 2 Ooly to the extent that Dasein has been brought before
itself in an ontologically essential manner through whatever disclosedness
belongs to it, can it Bee in theface ofthat in the face ofwhich it Bees. To be
sure, that in the face of which it Bees is not grasped in thus turning away
[Abkehr] in falling; nor is it experienced even in turning thither [Hinkehr].
Rather, in turning away from it, it is disclosed 'there'. This existentieIlontical turning-away, by reason of its character as a disclosure, makes it
phenomenally possible to grasp existentiai-ontologically that in the face
ofwhich Dasein Hees, and to grasp it as such. Within the ontical 'awayfrom' which such turning-away implies, that in the face of which Dasein
Bees can be understood and conceptualized by 'turning thither' in a way
which is phenomenologically Interpretative.
So in orienting our analysis by the phenomenon of falling, we are not
in principle condemned to be without any prospect of learning something
ontologically about the Dasein disclosed in that phenomenon. On the
contrary, here, least of aIl, has our Interpretation been surrendered to an
artificial way in which Dasein grasps itself; it merely carries out the
l ' • • • offenbart so etwas wie eine Flucht des Daseins vor ihm selbst aIs eigentlichem
Selbst-sein-kônnen.' The point of this paragraph is that if we are to study the totality of
Dasein, Dasein must be brought 'before itself' or 'face to face with itself' ('vor es selbst');
and the fact that Dasein Hees 'jrom itself' or 'in the face of itself' ('vor ihm selbst'), which
Dlay seem at first to lead us off the track, is actually very germane to our inquiry.
2 'lm Wovor der Flucht kommt das Dasein gerade "hinter" ihm her.'

185

Being and Time
1. 6
explication of what Dasein itself ontically discloses. The possibility of
proceeding towards Dasein's Being by going along with it and following
it up [Mit- und Nachgehen] Interpretatively with an understanding and
the state-of-mind that goes with it, is the greater, the more primordial is
that phenomenon which functions methodologically as a disclosive stateof-mind. It might be contended that anxiety performs sorne such function.
We are not entirely unprepared for the analysis of anxiety. Of course it
still remains obscure how this is connected ontologically with fear.
Obviously these are kindred phenomena. This is betokened by the fact
that for the most part they have not been distinguished from one another:
that which is fear, gets designated as "anxiety", while that which has the
character of anxiety, gets called "fear". We shall try to proceed towards
the phenomenon of anxiety step by step.
Dasein's falling into the "they" and the 'world' of its concern, is what
we have called a 'fleeing' in the face of itself. But one is not necessarily
fleeing whenever one shrinks back in the face of something or turns away
from it. Shrinking back in the face of what fear discloses-in the face of
something threatening-is founded upon fear; and this shrinking back has
the character of fleeing. Our Interpretation of fear as a state-of-mind has
shown that in each case that in the face of which we fear is a detrimental
entity within-the-world which cornes from sorne definite region but is
close by and is bringing itself close, and yet might stay away. In falling,
Dasein turns away from i tself. That in the face of which it thus shrinks
back must, in any case, be an entity with the character ofthreatening; yet
this entity has the same kind of Being as the one that shrinks back: it is
Dasein itself. That in the face of which it thus shrinks back cannot be
taken as something 'fearsome', for anything 'fearsome' is always encountered as an entity within-the-world. The only threatening which can be
'fearsome' and which gets discovered in fear, always cornes from entities
within-the-world.
Thus the turning-away offalling is not a fleeing that is founded upon a
fear of entities within-the-world. Fleeing that is so grounded is still less
a character of this turning-away, when what this turning-away does is
precisely to tum thither towards entities within-the-world by absorbing
itselfin them. The tuming-away offalling is grounded rather in anxiety, which in
tum is what first makesfear possible.
To understand this talk about Dasein's fleeing in the face of itself in
falling, we must recall that Being-in-the-world is a basic state of Dasein.
That Ùl the face of which one has anxiety [das Wovor der Angst] is Being-in-theworld as such. What is the difference phenomenally between that in the
face of which anxiety is anxious [sich angstet] and that in the face of
230

186

1.6
Being and Time
231
which fear is afraid? That in the face of which one has anxiety is not an
entity within-the-world. Thus it is essentially incapable of having an
involvement. This threatening does not have the character of a definite
detrimentality which reaches what is threatened, and which reaches it
with definite regard to a special factical potentiality-for-Being. That in the
face of which one is anxious is completely indefinite. Not only does this
indefiniteness leave factically undecided which entity within-the-world is
threatening us, but it also tells us that entities within-the-world are not
'relevant' at all. Nothing which is ready-to-hand or present-at-hand
within the world functions as that in the face of which anxiety is anxious.
Here the totality of involvements of the ready-to-hand and the presentat-band discovered within-the-world, is, as such, of no consequence; it
collapses into itself; the world has the character of completely lacking
significance. In anxiety one does not encounter this thing or that thing
which, as something threatening, must have an involvement.
Accordingly, when something threatening brings itself close, anxiety
does not 'see' any definite 'here' or 'yonder' from which it cornes. That in
the face of which one has anxiety is characterized by the fact that what
threatens is nowhere. Anxiety 'does not know' what that in the face of
which it is anxious is. 'Nowhere', however, does not signify nothing:
this is where any region lies, and there too lies any disclosedness of the
world for essentially spatial Being-in. Therefore that which threatens
cannot bring itself close from a definite direction within what is close by;
it is already 'there', and yet nowhere; it is so close that it is oppressive and
stifles one's breath, and yet it is nowhere.
In that in the face ofwhich one has anxiety, the 'It is nothing and nowhere' becomes manifest. The obstinacy of the "nothing and nowhere
within-the-world" means as a phenomenon that the world as such is that in
the face of wmch one kas anxiety. The utter insignificance which makes itself
known in the "nothing and nowhere", does not signify that the world is
absent, but tells us that entities within-the-world are of so little importance in themselves that on the basis of this insignificance of what is withinthe-world, the world in its worldhood is aIl that still obtrudes itself.
What oppresses us is not this or that, nor is it the summation of everything present-at-hand; it is rather the possibility of the ready-to-hand in
. general; that is to say, it is the world itself. When anxiety has subsided,
then in our everyday way oftalking we are accustomed to say that 'it was
really nothing'. And what it was, indeed, does get reached ontically by
such a way of talking. Everyday discourse tends towards concerning itself
with the ready-to-hand and talking about it. That in the face of which
anxiety is anxious is nothing ready-to-hand within-the-world. But this

187

Being and Time
I. 6
"nothing ready-to-hand", which only our everyday circumspective discourse understands, is not totally nothing. 1 The "nothing" of readinessto-hand is grounded in the most primordial 'something'-in the world.
Ontologically, however, the world belongs essentially to Dasein's Being as
Being-in-the-world. So if the "nothing"-that is, the world as suchexhibits itself as that in the face of which one has anxiety, this means
that Being-in-the-world itselfis that in theface of which anxïery is anxious.
Being-anxious discloses, primordially and directly, the world as world.
It is not the case, say, that the world first gets thought of by deliberating
about it, just by itself, without regard for the entities within-the-world,
and that, in the face of this world, anxiety then arises; what is rather the
case is that the world as world is disclosed first and foremost byanxiety, as
a mode of state-of-mind. This does not signify, however, that in anxiety
the worldhood of the world gets conceptualized.
Anxiety is not only anxiety in the face of something, but, as a state-ofmind, it is also anxiery about something. That which anxiety is profoundly
anxious [sich abangstet] about is not a definite kind of Being for Dasein or
a definite possibility for it. Indeed the threat itself is indefinite, and therefore cannot penetrate threateningly to this or that factically concrete
potentiality-for-Being. That which anxiety is anxious about is Being-inthe world itself. In anxiety what is environmentally ready-to-hand sinks
away, and so, in general, do entities within-the-world. The 'world' can
offer nothing more, and neither can the Dasein-with of Others. Anxiety
thus takes away from Dasein the possibility of understanding itself, as it
falls, in terms of the 'world' and the way things have been publicly interpreted. Anxiety throws Dasein back upon that which it is anxious about
-its authentic potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world. Anxiety individualizes
Dasein for its ownmost Being-in-the-world, which as something that understands, projects itself essentially upon possibilities. Therefore, with that
188 which it is anxious about, anxiety discloses Dasein as Being-possible, and
indeed as the only kind of thing which it can be of its own accord as
something individualized in individualization [vereinzeltes in der Vereinzelung].
Anxiety makes manifest in Dasein its Being towards its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-that is, its Being-free for the freedom of choosing itself
and taking hold ofitself. Anxiety brings Dasein face to face with its Beingfreefor (propensio in • •.) the authenticity ofits Being, and for this authenticity as a possibility which it always is.:I But at the same time, this is the

1.6
Being and Time
233
Being to which Dasein as Being-in-the-world has been delivered over.
That about which anxiety is anxious reveals itself as that in the face of
which it is anxious-namely, Being-in-the-world. The selfsameness of that
in the face of which and that about which one has anxiety, extends even
to anxiousness [Sichangsten] itself. For, as a state-of-mind, anxiousness is
a basic kind of Being-in-the-world. Bere the disclosure and the disclosed are
existentially selfsame in such a way that in the latter the world kas been disclosed
as world, and Being-in kas been disclosed as a potentialiry-Jor-Being which is
individuali;:;ed, pure, and thrown; this makes it plain that with the phenomenon of
anxiery a distinctive state-of-mind kas become a theme for Interpretation. Anxiety
individualizes Dasein and thus discloses it as 'solus ipse'. But this existential
'solipsism' is so far from the displacement of putting an isolated subjectThing into the innocuous emptiness of a worldless occurring, that in an
extreme sense what it does is precisely to bring Dasein face to face with its
world as world, and thus bring it face to face with itself as Being-in-theworld.
Again everyday discourse and the everyday interpretation of Dasein
furnish our most unbiased evidence that anxiety as a basic state-of-mind
is disclosive in the manner we have shown. As we have said earlier, a
state-of-mind makes manifest 'how one is'. In anxiety one feels 'uncanny'.l
Here the peculiar indefiniteness of that which Dasein finds itself alongside
in anxiety, comes proximally to expression: the "nothing and nowhere".
But here "uncanniness" also means "not-being-at-home" [das Nichtzuhause-sein]. In our first indication of the phenomenal character of
Dasein's basic state and in our clarification of the existential meaning of
"Being-in" as distinguished from the categorial signification of 'insideness',
Being-in was defined as "residing alongside . • .", "Being-familiar with
•••"11 This character ofBeing-in was then brought to view more concretely
through the everyday publicness of the "they", which brings tranquillized
self-assurance-'Being-at-home', with aIl its obviousness-into the average everydayness of Dasein.1U On the other hand, as Dasein falls, anxiety
brings it back from its absorption in the 'world'. Everyday familiarity
collapses. Dasein has been individualized, but individualized as Being-inthe-world. Being-in enters into the existential 'mode' of the "not-at-home".
Nothing else is meant by our talk about 'uncanniness'.
By this time we can see phenomenally what falling, as Heeing, Hees in
the face of. 1t does not Hee in theface of entities within-the-world; these are
precisely what it Hees towards-as entities alongside which our concern,

l 'Allein dieses Nichts von Zuhandenem, das die alltiigliche umsichtige Rede einzig
versteht, ist kein totales Nichts.' This sentence is grammatica11y ambiguous.
Il 'Die Angst bringt das Dasein vor sein Freiseinfür ••• (propensio in ...) die Eigentlichkeit seines Seins ais Maglichkeit, die es immer schon ist.'

l 'Befindlichkeit, so wurde früher gesagt, macht offenbar, "wie einem ist". In der Angst
ist einem "unheimlich" .' The reference is presumably to H. 134 above. While 'unheimlich' is
here translated as 'uncanny', it means more literally 'unhomelike', as the author proceeds
to point out.

232

189

234

Being and Time

I. 6

lost in the "they", can dwell in tranquillized familiarity. When in falling
we flee into the "at-home" of publicness, we flee in the face qf the "not-athome" ; that is, we flee in the face of the uncanniness which lies in Dasein
-in Dasein as thrown Being-in-the-world, which has been delivered over
to itselfin its Being. This uncanniness pursues Dasein constantIy, and is a
threat to its everyday lostness in the "they", though not explicitIy. This
threat can go together factically with complete assurance and selfsufficiency in one's everyday concern. Anxiety can arise in the most
innocuous Situations. Nor does it have any need for darkness, in which it
is commooly easier for one to feel uncanny. In the dark there is emphatically 'nothing' to see, though the very world itselfis still 'there', and 'there'

19°

more obtrusive{y.
If we Interpret Dasein's uncanniness from an existential-ontological
point of view as a threat which reaches Dasein itself and which cornes
from Dasein itself, we are not contending that in factical anxiety too it
has always been understood in this sense. When Dasein "understands"
uncanniness in the everyday manner, it does so by turning away from it
in falling; in this turning-away, the "not-at-home" gets 'dimmed down'.
Yet the everydayness of this fleeing shows phenomenally that anxiety,as
a basic state-of-mind, belongs to Dasein's essential state of Being-in-theworld, which, as one that is existential, is never present-at-hand but is
itself always in a mode of factical Being-therel-that is, in the mode of
a state-of-mind. That kind of Being-in-the-world which is tranquillized
and familiar is a mode of Dasein's uncanniness, not the reverse. From an
existential-ontological point qf view, the "not-at-Iwme" must be c01l&eWed as the more
primordial phenomenon.
And only because anxiety is always latent in Being-in-the-world, cao
such Being-in-the-world, as Being which is alongside the 'world' and which
is concernful in its state-of-mind, ever be afraid. Fear is amciety, fallen
into the 'world', inauthentic, and, as such, hidden from itself.
After all, the mood of uncanniness remains, factically, something for
which we mostIy have no existentiell understanding. Moreover, under the
ascendancy of falling and publicness, 'real' anxiety is rare. Anxiety
is often conditioned by 'physiological' factors. This fact, in its facticity, is
a problem ontological{y, not merely with regard to its ontical causation and
course of development. Ooly because Dasein is anxious in the very depths
of its Being, does it become possible for anxiety to be elicited physiologically.
Even rarer than the existentiell Fact of "reaI" anxiety are attempts to
1 Here we follow the earlier editions in reading 'Da-seins'. In the later editions the
hyphen appears ambiguously at the end of a line.

I. 6
Being and Time
235
Interpret this phenomenon according to the principles of its existentialontological Constitution and function. The reasons for this lie partIy in
the general neglect of the existential analytic of Dasein, but more particularly in a failure to recognize the phenomenon of state-of-mindiv• Yet
the factical rarity of anxiety as a phenomenon cannot deprive it of its
fitness to take over a methodological function in pri1l&iple for the existential
analytic. On the contrary, the rarity of the phenomenon is an index that
Dasein, which for the most part remains concealed from itself in its
authenticity because of the way in which things have been publidy interpreted by the "they", becomes disclosable in a primordial sense in this
basic state-of-mind.
Of course it is essential to every state-of-mind that in each case Beingin-the-world should be fully disdosed in aIl those items which are constitutive for it-world, Being-in, Self. But in anxiety there lies the possibility ofa disdosure which is quite distinctiye; for anxiety individualizes.
This individualization brings Dasein back from its falling, and makes
manifest to it that authenticity and inauthenticity are possibilities of its
Being. These basic possibilities of Dasein (and Dasein is in each case
mine) show themselves in anxiety as they are in themselves-undisguised
by entities within-the-world, to which, proximally and for the most part,
Dasein dings.
How far has this existential Interpretation of anxiety arrived at a
phenomenal basis for answering the guiding question of the Being of the
totality of Dasein's structural whole?

, 41. Dasein's Being as Care
Since our aim is to grasp the totality of this structural whole ontologically, we must first ask whether the phenomenon of anxiety and that
which is disclosed in it, can give us the whole of Dasein in a way which is
phenomenally equiprimordial, and whether they can do so in such a
manner that if we look searchingly at this totality, our view of it will be
filled in by what has thus been given us. The entire stock of what lies
therein may be counted up formally and recorded: anxiousness as a stateof-mind is a way of Being-in-the-world; that in the face of which we have
anxiety is thrown Being-in-the-world; that which we have anxiety about
is our potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world. Thus the entire phenomenon of
anxiety shows Dasein as factically existing Being-in-the-world. The fundamental ontological characteristics of this entity are existentiality, facticity,
and Being-fallen. These existential characteristics are not pieces belonging
to something composite, one of which might sometimes be missing; but
there is woven together in them a primordial context which makes up

191

192

236
Being and Time
I. 6
that totality of the structural whole which we are seeking. In the unitY
of those characteristics of Dasein's Being which we have mentioned, this
Being becomes something which it is possible for us to grasp as such
ontologically. How is this unitYitselfto be characterized?
Dasein is an entity for which, in its Being, that Being is an issue. The
phrase 'is an issue' has been made plain in the state-of-Being of understanding-of understanding as self-projective Being towards its ownmost
potentiality-for-Being. This poten#ality is that for the sake of which any
Dasein is as it is. In each case Dasein has already compared itself, in its
Being, with a possibility ofitself. Being-freefor one's ownmost potentialityfor-Being, and therewith for the possibility of authenticity and inauthenticity, is shown, with a primordial, elemental concreteness, in anxiety.
But ontologically, Being towards one's ownmost potentiality-for-Being
means that in each case Daseinis already ahead of itself [ihm selbst ...
vorweg] in its Being. Dasein is always 'beyond itself' ["über sich hinaus"],
not as a way of behaving towards other entities which it is not, but as
Being towards the potentiality-for-Being which it is itself. This structure
of Being, which belongs to the essential 'is an issue', we shall denote as
Dasein's "Being-ahead-of-itself".
But this structure pertains to the whole ofDasein's constitution. "Beingahead-of-itself" does not signify anything like an isolated tendency in a
worldless 'subject', but characterizes Being-in-the-world. To Being-in-theworld, however, belongs the fact that it has been delivered over to itselfthat it has in each case already been thrown into a world. The abandonment
of Dasein to itself is shown with primordial concreteness in anxiety.
"Being-ahead-of-itself" means, if we grasp it more fully, "ahead-of-itselfin-already-heing-in-a-world". As soon as this essentially unitary structure is
seen as a phenomenon, what we have set forth earlier in our analysis of
worldhood aiso becomes plain. The upshot of that analysis was that the
referential totality of significance (which as such is constitutive for worldhood) has been 'tied up' with a "for-the-sake-of-which". The fact that this
referential totality of the manifold relations of the 'in-order-to' has been
bound up with that which is an issue for Dasein, does not signify that a
'world' ofObjects which is present-at-hand has been welded together with
a subject. It is rather the phenomenal expression of the fact that the constitution of Dasein, whose totality is now brought out explicitly as aheadof-itself-in-Being-already-in .. " is primordially a whole. To put it otherwise, existing is always factical. EXistentiality is essentially determined by
facticity.
Furthermore, Dasein's factical existing is not only generally and without
further differentiation a thrown potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world; it is

J. 6

Being and Time
237
always also absorbed in the world of its concern. In this falling Beingalongside ..., fleeing in the face ofuncanniness (which for the most part
remains concealed with latent anxiety, since the publicness of the "they"
suppresses everything unfamiliar), announces itself, whether it does so
explicitly or not, and whether it is understood or not. Ahead-of-itselfBeing-already-in-a-world essentially incIudes one's falling and one's
Being alongside those things ready-to-hand within-the-world with which
one concerns oneself.
The formally existential totality ofDasein's ontological structural whole
must therefore be grasped in the following structure: the Being of Dasein
means ahead-of-itself-Being-already-in-(the-world) as Being-alongside
(entities encountered within-the-world). This Being filis in the signification of the term "care" [Sorge] , which is used in a purely ontologicoexistential manner. From this signification every tendency of Being which
one might have in mind ontically, such as worry [Besorgnis] or carefreeness
[Sorglosigkeit], is ruled out.
Because Being-in-the-world is essentially care, Being-alongside the
~ady-to-hand could be taken in our previous analyses as concern, and
eing with the Dasein-with of Others as we encounter it within-theworld could be taken as solicitude. 1 Being-alongside something is concern,
Jecause it is defined as a way of Being-in by its basic structure-care.
::are does not characterize just existentiality, let us say, as detached from
àcticity and falling; on the contrary, it embraces the unitYof these ways
n which Being may be characterized. So neither does "care" stand
)rimarily and exclusively for an isolated attitude of the "1" towards
tself. If one were to construct the expression 'care for oneself' ["SelbstiOrge"], following the analogy of "concern" [Besorgen] and "solicitude"
:Fürsorge], this would be a tautology. "Care" cannot stand for sorne
lpecial attitude towards the Self; for the Self has already been characterized ontologically by "Being-ahead-of-itself", a characteristic in which the
:>ther two items in the structure of care-Being-already-in ... and Beingalongside ...-have beenjointry posited [mitgesetzt].
In Being-ahead-of-oneself as Being towards one's ownmost potentialityfor-Being, lies the existentiai-ontologicai condition for the possibility of
Being-free for authentic existentiell possibilities. For the sake of its potentiality-for-Being, any Dasein is as it factically is. But to the extent that this
Being towards its potentiality-for-Being is itself characterized by freedom,
Dasein can comport itself towards its possibilities, even unwillingry; it can
be inauthentically; and factically it is inauthentically, proximally and for
the most part. The authentic "for-the-sake-of-which" has not been taken
1 Cf. H. 1111 and 131 above.

193

238
Being and Time
I. 6
hold of; the projection of one's own potentiality-for-Being has been
abandoned to the disposaI of the "they". Thus when we speak of "Beingahead-of-itself", the 'itself' which we have in mind is in each case the Self
in the sense of the they-self. Even in inauthenticity Dasein remains
essentially ahead of itself, just as Dasein's fleeing in the face of itself as it
faIls, still shows that it has the state-of-Being of an entity for which its
Being is an issue.

Care, as a primordial structural totality, lies 'before' ["vor"] every
factical 'attitude' and 'situation' of Dasein, and it does so existentially a
priori; this means that it always lies in them. So this phenomenon by no
means expresses a priority of the 'practical' attitude over the theoreticaI.
When we ascertain something present-at-hand by merely beholding it,
this activity has the character of care just as much as does a 'political
action' or taking a rest and enjoying oneself. 'Theory' and 'practice' are
possibilities of Being for an entity whose Being must be defined as "care".
The phenomenon of care in its totality is essentially something that
cannot be tom asunder; so any attempts to trace it back to special acts
194 or drives like willing and wishing or urge and addiction, 1 or to construct
it out of these, will be unsuccessfuI.
Willing and wishing are rooted with ontological necessity in Dasein as
care; they are not just ontologically undifferentiated Experiences occurring in a 'stream' which is completely indefinite with regard to the
meaning of its Being. This is no less the case with urge and addiction.
These too are grounded in care so far as they can be exhibited in Dasein
at aIl. This does not prevent them from being ontologically constitutive
even for entities that merely 'live'. But the basic ontological state of 'living'
is a problem in its own right and can be tackled only reductively and
privatively in terms of the ontology ofDasein.
Care is ontologically 'earlier' than the phenomena we have just
mentioned, which admittedly can, within certain limits, always be
'described' appropriately without our needing to have the full ontological
horizon visible, or even to be familiar with it at aIl. From the standpoint
of our present investigation in fundamental ontology, which aspires
neither to a thematically complete ontology of Dasein nor even to a
concrete anthropology, it must suffice to suggest how these phenomena
are grounded existentiaIly in care.
That very potentiality-for-Being for the sake of which Dasein is, has
Being-in-the-world as its kind of Being. Thus it implies ontologically a
relation to entities within-the-world. Care is aIways concem and solicitude,
l ' ... besondere Akte oder Triebe wie Wollen und Wünschen oder Drang und Hang ...'
Cf. H. 182.

I. 6
Being and Time
239
even if only privatively. In willing, an entity which is understood-that is,
one which has been projected upon its possibility-gets seized upon,
either as something with which one may concem oneself, or as something
which is to be brought into its Being through solicitude. Hence, to any
willing there belongs something willed, which has aIready made itself
definite in terms of a "for-the-sake-of-which". If willing is to be possible
ontologicaIly, the following items are constitutive for it.: (1) the prior
disclosedness of the "for-the-sake-of-which" in generaI (Being-ahead-ofitself); (2) the disclosedness of something with which one can concem
oneself (the world as the "wherein" of Being-aIready);1 (3) Dasein's
projection of itself understandingly upon a potentiaIity-for-Being towards
a possibility of the entity 'willed'. In the phenomenon ofwilling, the underlying totality of care shows through.
As something facticaI, Dasein's projection of itself understandingly is
in each case aIready alongside a world that has been discovered. From
this world it takes its possibilities, and it does so flrst in accordance with
the way things have been interpreted by the "they". This interpretation
has already restricted the possible options of choice to what lies within
the range of the familiar, the attainable, the respectable-that which is
fitting and proper. This levelling off of Dasein's possibilities to what is
proximally at its everyday disposai also results in a dimming down of the
possible as such. The average everydayness of concern becomes blind to
its possibilities, and tranquillizes itself with that which is merely 'actual'.
This tranquillizing does not rule out a high degree of diligence in one's
concem, but arouses it. In this case no positive new possibilities are willed,
but that which is at one's disposai becomes 'tacticaIly' aItered in such a
way that there is a semblance ofsomething happening.
AIl the same, this tranquillized 'willing' under the guidance of the
"they", does not signify that one's Being towards one's potentiality-forBeing has been extinguished, but only that it has been modified. In such
a case, one's Being towards possibilities shows itself for the most part as
mere wishing. In the wish Dasein projects its Being upon possibilities which
not only have not been taken hold of in concem, but whose fulfilment has
not even been pondered over and expected. On the contrary, in the mode
of mere wishing, the ascendancy of Being-ahead-of-oneself brings with it
a lack of understanding' for the factical possibilities. When the world has
been primarily projected as a wish-world, Being-in-the-world has lost
itselfinertly in what is at its disposaI; but it has done so in such a way
that, in the light of what is wished for, that which is at its disposai (and
this is ail that is ready-to-hand) is never enough. Wishing is an existential
1 ' ••• (Welt aIs das Worin des Schon-seins) ....

195

Being and Time
I. 6
modification of projecting oneself understandingly, when such selfprojection has fallen forfeit to thrownness and just keeps hankering after
possibilities. 1 Such hankering closes off the possibilities; what is 'there' in
wishful hankering turns into the 'actual world'. Ontologically, wishing
presupposes care.
In hankering, Being-already-alongside ... takes priority. The "aheadof-itself-in-Being-already-in •.." is correspondingly modified. Dasein's
hankering as it falls makes manifest its addiction to becoming 'lived' by
whatever world it is in. This addiction shows the character of Being out
for something [Ausseins auf ...]. Being-ahead-of-oneself has lost itself in
a 'just-always-already-alongside'. 2 What one is addicted 'towards' [Das
"Hin-zu" des Ranges] is to let oneself be drawn by the sort of thing for
which the addiction hankers. IfDasein, as it were, sinks into an addiction
then there is not merely an addiction present-at-hand, but the entire
structure of care has been modified. Dasein has become blind, and puts
aIl possibilities into the service of the addiction.
On the other hand, the urge 'to live' is something 'towards' which one
is impelled, and it brings the impulsion along with it of its own accord. 3
It is 'towards this at any priee'. The urge seeks to crowd out [verdrangen]
other possibilities. Here too the Being-ahead-of-oneself is one that is
inauthentic, even if one is assailed by an urge coming from the very thing
that is urging one on. The urge can outrun one's CUITent state-of-mind
and one's understanding. But then Dasein is not-and never is-a 'mere
urge' to which other kinds of controlling or guiding behaviour are added
from time to time; rather, as a modification of the entirety of Being-inthe-world, it is always care already.
In pure urge, care has not yet become free, though care fust makes it
ontologically possible for Dasein to be urged on by itself. & In addiction,
however, care has always been bound. Addiction and urge are possibilities
rooted in the thrownness of Dasein. The urge 'to live' is not to be annihilated; the addiction to becoming 'lived' by the world is not to be rooted
out. But because these are both grounded ontologically in care, and only
because of this, they are both to be modified in an ontical and existentiell
manner by care--by care as something authentic.
With the expression 'care' we have in mind a basic existential-ontological phenomenon, which aIl the same is not simple in its structure. The
240

196

l ' ••• das, der Geworfenheit verfallen, den Moglichkeiten lediglich noch nm;hhiingt,'
Il '. • • in ein "Nur-immer-schon-bei • • ," .. Here we follow the reading of the later

editions. The earlier editions have' "Nur-immer-schon-sein-bei •..'" ('just-alwaysBeing-already-alongside').
a 'Dagegen ist der Drang "zu leben" ein "Hin-zu", das von ibm selbst her den Antrieb
mitbringt,' The ita1icization of 'Drang' appears only in the later editions.
.. '... das Bedriingtsein des Daseins aus ibm selbst her ....

J. 6

Being and Time
241
ontologically elemental totality of the care-structure cannot be traced
back to sorne ontical 'primaI element', just as Being certainly cannot be
'explained' in terms of entities. In the end it will be shown that the idea
of Being in general is just as far from being 'simple' as is the Being of
Dasein. In defining "care" as "Being-ahead-of-oneself-in-Being-alreadyin ...-as Being-alongside ••.", we have made it plain that even this
phenomenon is, in itself, still structurally articulated. But is this not a
phenomenal symptom that we must pursue the ontological question even
further until we can exhibit a still more primordial phenomenon which
provides the ontological support for the unity and the totality of the
structural manifoldness of care? Before we follow up this question, we
must look back and appropriate with greater precision what we have
hitherto Interpreted in aiming at the question of fundamental ontology
as to the meaning of Being in general. First, however, we must show that
what is ontologically 'new' in this Interpretation is ontically quite old.
In explicating Dasein's Being as care, we are not forcing it under an idea
of our own contriving, but we are conceptualizing existentially what has
already been disclosed in an ontico-existentiell manner.

, 42. Confirmation of the Existential Interpretation of Dasein as Care in terms of
Dasein's Pre-ontological Way of Interpreting ItselJ1
In our foregoing Interpretations, which have finally led to exhibiting
care as the Being of Dasein, everything depended on our arriving at the
right ontological foun.dations for that entity which in each case we ourselves
are, and which we calI 'man'. To do this it was necessary from the outset
to change the direction ofour analysis from the approach presented by the
traditional definition of "man"-an approach which has not been
clarified ontologically and is in principle questionable. In comparison
with this definition, the existential-ontological Interpretation may seem
strange, especially if'care' is understoodjust ontically as 'worry' or 'grief'
[als "Besorgnis" und "Bekümmernis"]. Accordingly we shall now cite a
document which is pre-ontological in character, even though its demonstrative force is 'merely historical'.
We must bear in mind, however, that in this document Dasein is expressing itself 'primordially', unaffected by any theoretical Interpretation and
without aiming to propose any. We must also note that Dasein's Being is
characterized by historicality, though this must fust be demonstrated
ontologically. lfDasein is 'historical' in the very depths ofits Being, then
a deposition [Aussage] which cornes from its history and goes back to it,
1 •Die Bewtihrung der exislenzialen Interpretation des Daseins ais Sorge DUS der vorontologischen
S,lbstauskgung des Daseins.'

197

242
Being and Time
I. 6
and which, moreover, is prior to any scientific knowledge, will have especial
weight, even though its importance is never purely ontological. That
understanding of Being which lies in Dasein itself, expresses itself preontologically. The document which we are about to cite should make plain
that our existential Interpretation is not a mere fabrication, but that as
an ontological 'construction' it is well grounded and has been sketched
out beforehand in elemental ways.
There is an ancient fable in which Dasein's interpretation of itself as
'care' has been embedded: v

198

Cura cum fluvium transiret, vidit cretosum lutum
sustulitque cogitabunda atque coepit fingere.
dum deliberat quid iamfecisset, Jovis intervenit.
rogat eum Cura ut det illi spiritum, et facile impetrat.
cui cum vellet Cura nomen ex sese ipsa imponere,
Jovis prohibuit suumque nomen ei dandum esse dietitat.
dum Cura et Jovis disceptant, Tellus surrexit simul
suumque nomen esse volt cui corpus praebuerit suum.
sumpserunt Satumum iudieem, is sie aecus iudieat:
'tu Jovis quia spiritum dedisti, in morte spiritum,
tuque Tellus, quia dedisti corpus, corpus recipito,
Cura eum quia prima finxit, teneat quamdiu vixerit.
sed quae nunc de nomine eius vobis controversia est,
homo vocetur, quia videtur esse factus ex humo.'
'Once when 'Care' was crossing a river, she saw sorne clay; she thoughtfully took up a piece and began to shape it. While she was meditating on
what she had made, Jupiter came by. 'Care' asked him to give it spirit,
and this he gladly granted. But when she wanted her name to be bestowed
upon it, he forbade this, and demanded that it be given his name instead.
While 'Care' and Jupiter were disputing, Earth arose and desired that
her own name be conferred on the creature, since she had furnished it
with part ofher body. They asked Saturn to be their arbiter, and he made
the following decision, which seemed ajust one: 'Since you,Jupiter, have
given its spirit, you shall receive that spirit at its death; and since you,
Earth, have given its body, you shall receive its body. But since 'Care'
first shaped this creature, she shall possess it as long as it lives. And because
there is now a dispute among you as to its name, let it be called 'homo',
for it is made out of humus (earth).'l
1 In both the earlier and later editions Heidegger has 'videt' in the first line of the Latin

version of the fable, where Bücheler, from whom the text has been taken, has 'vidit'; in
the 12th line Heidegger has 'enim' where Bücheler has 'eum'. The punctuation of the
Latin version is as Bücheler gives it. The single quotation marks in the English translation

J. 6

Being and Time
243
This pre-ontological document becomes especially significant not only
in that 'care' is here seen as that to which human Das9in belongs 'for its
lifetime', but also because this priority of 'care' emerges in connection
with the familiar way oftaking man as compounded of body (earth) and
spirit. "Cura primafinxit": in care this entity has the 'source' of its Being.
"Cura teneat, quamdiu vixent"; the entity is not released from this source but
is held fast, dominated by it through and through as long as this entity
'is in the world'. 'Being-in-the-world' has the stamp of 'care', which
accords with its Being. It gets the name "homo" not in consideration ofits
Being but in relation to that ofwhich it consists (humus). The decision as
to wherein the 'primordial' Being of this creature is to be seen, is Ieft to
Saturn, 'Time'.vi Thus the pre-ontological characterization of man's
essence expressed in this fable, has brought to view in advance the kind
of Being which dominates his temporal sojoum in the world, and does so
through and through.
The history of the signification of the ontical concept of 'care' permits
us to see still further basic structures ofDasein. Burdach vU calls attention
to a double meaning of the term 'cura' according to which it signifies not
only 'anxious exertion' but also 'carefulness' and 'devotedness' ["SorgfaIt", "Hingabe"]. Thus Seneca writes in his last epistle (Ep. 124):
'Among the four existent Natures (trees, beasts, man, and God), the latter
two, which alone are endowed with reason, are distinguished in that God
is immortal while man is mortal. Now when it cornes to these, the good
of the one, namely God, is fulfilled by his Nature; but that of the other,
man, is fulfilled by care (cura): "unius bonum natura perjicit, dei seilieet,
altenus cura, hominis."
Man's perfectio-his transformation into that which he can be in Beingfree for his ownmost possibilities (projection)-is 'accomplished' by 'care'.
But with equal primordiality 'care' determines what is basically specific
in this entity, according to which it has been surrendered to the world
of its concern (thrownness). In the 'double meaning' of 'care', what we
have in view is a single basic state in its essentially twofold structure of
thrown projection.
As compared with this ontical interpretation, the existential-ontological
Interpretation is not, let us say, merely an ontical generalization which is
theoretical in character. That would just mean that ontically all man's
ways of behaving are 'full of care' and are guided by his 'devotedness' to
correspond strictly to the double quotation marks in Heidegger's version; sorne of these
are not found in Burdach's translation, which, except for two entirely trivial changes,
Heidegger has otherwise reproduced very accurately. (On Bücheler and Burdach, see
Heidegger's note v, ad loc.) Our translation is a compromise between Burdach and the
original Latin.

199

200

244
Being and Time
I. 6
something. The 'generalization' is rather one that is ontological and a
priori. What it has in view is not a set of ontical properties which constantly keep emerging, but a state of Being which is already underlying
in every case, and which first makes it ontologically possible for this
entity to be addressed ontically as "cura". The existential condition for the
possibility of 'the cares of life' and 'devotedness', must be conceived as
care, in a sense which is primordial-that is ontological.
The transcendental 'generality' of the phenomenon of care and of
aH fundamental existentialia is, on the other hand, broad enough to
present a basis on which every interpretation of Dasein which is
ontical and belongs to a world-view must move, whether Dasein is
understood as affiiction [Not] and the 'cares of life' or in an opposite
manner.
The very 'emptiness' and 'generality' which obtrude themselves
ontically in existential structures, have an ontological definiteness and
fulness of their own. Thus Dasein's whole constitution itselfiS not simple in
its unity, but shows a structural articulation; in the existential conception
of care, this articulation becomes expressed.
Thus, by our ontological Interpretation of Dasein, we have been
brought to the existential conception of care from Dasein's pre-ontological
interpretation of itself as 'care'. Yet the analytic of Dasein is not aimed at
laying an ontological basis for anthropology; its purpose is one of fundamental ontology. This is the purpose that has tacitly determined the
course of our considerations hitherto, our selection of phenomena, and
the limits to which our analysis may proceed. Now, however, with regard
to our leading question of the meaning of Being and our way of working
this out, our investigation must give us explicit assurance as to what we
have so far achieved. But this sort of thing is not to be reached by superficially taking together what we have discussed. Rather, with the help of
what we have achieved, that which could be indicated only crudely at
the beginning of the existential analytic, must now be concentrated into
a more penetrating understanding of the problem.
~ 43. Dasein, Worlrihood, and Reality

The question of the meaning of Being becomes possible at all only if
there is something like an understanding of Being. Understanding of
Being belongs to the kind of Being which the entity called "Dasein"
possesses. The more appropriately and primordially we have succeeded
in explicating this entity, the surer we are to attain our goal in the further
course ofworking out the problem offundamental ontology.
In our pursuit of the tasks ofa preparatory existential analytic ofDasein,

J. 6

Being and Time
245
there emerged an Interpretation of understanding, meaning, and interpretation. Our analysis ofDasein's disclosedness showed further that, with
this disclosedness, Dasein, in its basic state ofBeing-in-the-world, has been
revealed equiprimordially with regard to the world, Being-in, and the
Self. Furthermore, in the factical disclosedness of the world, entities
within-the-world are discovered too. This implies that the Being of these
entities is always understood in a certain manner, even ifit is not conceived
in a way which is appropriately ontological. To be sure, the pre-ontological understanding of Being embraces all entities which are essentially
disclosed in Dasein; but the understanding of Being has not yet Articulated itself in a way which corresponds to the various modes of Being.
At the same time our interpretation of understanding has shown that,
in accordance with its falling kind of Being,'it has, proximally and for the
most part, diverted itself [sich •.• verlegt] into an understanding of the
'world'. Even where the issue is not only one of ontical experience but
also one ofontological understanding, the interpretation ofBeing takes its
orientation in the first instance from the Being of entities within-theworld. Thereby the Being ofwhat is proximally ready-to-hand gets passed
over, and entities are first conceived as a context ofThings (res) which are
present-at-hand. "Being" acquires the meaning of "Reality".v111 Substantiality becomes the basic characteristic ofBeing. Corresponding to this
way in which the understanding of Being' has been diverted, even the
ontological understanding of Dasein moves into the horizon of this conception of Being. Like any other entity, Dasein too is present-at-hand as Real.
In this way "Being in general" acquires the meaning of "Reality". Accordingly the concept of Reality has a peculiar priority in the ontological
problematic. By this priority the route to a genuine existential analytic
ofDasein gets diverted, and so too does our very view of the Being ofwhat
is proximally ready-to-hand within-the-world. It finally forces the general
problematic of Being into a direction that lies off the course. The other
modes of Being become defined negatively and privatively with regard to
Reality.
Thus not only the analytic ofDasein but the working-out ofthe question
of the meaning ofBeing in general must be tumed away from a one-sided
orientation with regard to Being in the sense of Reality. We must demonstrate that Reality is not onlyone kind of Being among others, but that ontologically it has a definite connection in its foundations with Dasein, the
world, and readiness-to-hand. To demonstrate this we must discuss in
principle the prohlem of Reality, its conditions and its limits.
Under the heading 'problem of Reality' various questions are clustered:
(1) whether any entities which supposedly 'transcend our consciousness'

201

202

246
Being and Time
I. 6
are at all; (2) whether this Realityofthe 'external world' can be adequate1y
proved; (3) how·far this entity, if it is Real, is to be known in its Being-initse1f; (4) what the meaning of this entity, Reality, signifies in general.
The following discussion of the problem of Reality will treat three topics
with regard to the question of fundamental ontology: (a) Reality as a
problem of Being, and whether the 'external world' can be proved; (b)
Reality as an ontological problemj (c) Reality and care.
(a) Reality as a problem of Being, and whether the 'External World' can be
Proved
Of these questions about Reality, the one which comes first i~\order is
the ontological question of what "Reality" signifies in general But as
long as a pure ontological problematic and methodology was acking,
this question (if it was explicitly formulated at all) was necessarily confounded with a discussion of the 'problem of the external world'; for the
analysis of Reality is possible only on the basis of our having apprqpriate
access to the Real. But it has long been he1d that the way to grasp th9 Real
is by that kind of knowing which is characterized by beholding [das
anschauende Erkennen]. Such knowing ois' as a way in which the soulor consciousness-behaves. In so far as Reality has the character of
something independent and "in itself", the question of the meaning of
"Reality" becomes linked with that of whether the Real can be independent 'of consciousness' or whether there can be a transcendence of
consciousness into the 'sphere' of the Real. The possibility of an adequate
ontological analysis of Reality depends upon how far that of which the Real
is to be thus independent-how far that which is to be transcended '"-has
itself been clarified with regard to its Being. Only thus can even the kind
of Being which be10ngs to transcendence be ontologically grasped. And
finally we must make sure what kind of primary access we have to the
Real, by deciding the question of whether knowing can take over this
fUllction at all.
These investigations, which take precedence over any possible ontological
question about Reality, have been carried out in the foregoing existential
analytic. According to this analytic, knowing is a founded mode of access
to the Real. The Real is essentially accessible only as entities within-theworld. AlI access to such entities is founded ontologically upon the basic
state of Dasein, Being-in-the-world; and this in turn has care as its even
more primordial state of Being (ahead ofitse1f-Being already in a world
-as Being alongside entities within-the-world).
The question of whether there is a world at all and whether its Being
1 c••• das, wovon Unabhangigkeit bestehen 5011, was transzendiert werden soli .. .'

J. 6
Being and Time
247
can be proved, makes no sense if it is raised by Dasein as Being-in-theworld; and who e1se would raise it? Furthermore, it is encumbered with
a double signification. The world as the "wherein" [das Worin] ofBeingin, and the 'world' as entities within-the-world (that in which [das
Wobei] one is concernfully absorbed) either have been confused or are
not distinguished at all. But the world is disclosed essentially along with the
Being of Dasein; with the disclosedness of the world, the 'world' has in
each case been discovered too. Of course entiti(~s within-the-world in the
sense of the Real as mere1y present-at-hand, are the very things that can
remain concealed. But even the Real can be discovered only on the basis
of a world which has already been disclosed. And only on this basis can
anything Real still remain hidden. The question of the 'Reality' of the
'external world' gets raised without any previous clarification of the
phenomenon of the world as such. Factically, the 'problem of the external
world' is constantly oriented with regard to entities within-the-world
(Things and abjects). So these discussions drift along into a problematic
which it is almost impossible to disentangle ontologically.
Kant's 'Refutation of Idealism'ix shows how intricate these questions
are and how what one wants to prove gets muddled with what one does
prove and with the means whereby the proof is carried out. Kant calls
it 'a scandaI of philosophy and of human reason in general'x that there is
still no cogent prooffor the 'Dasein of Things outside of us' which will do
away with any scepticism. He proposes such a proof himse1f, and indeed
he does so to provide grounds for his 'theorem' that 'The mere consciousness of my own Dasein-a consciousness which, however, is empirical in
character-proves the Dasein of objects in the space outside of me.'xJ
We must in the first instance note explicitly that Kant uses the term
'Dasein' to designate that kind ofBeing which in the present investigation
we have called 'presence-at-hand'. 'Consciousness of my Dasein' means
for Kant a consciousness of my Being-present-at-hand in the sense of
Descartes. When Kant uses the term 'Dasein' he has in mind the Beingpresent-at-hand of consciousness just as much as the Being-present-athand of Things.
The prooffor the 'Dasein of Things outside of me' is supported by the
fact that both change and performance belong, with equal primordia ity,
to the essence of time. My own Being-present-at-hand-that is, the
Being-present-at-hand ofa multiplicity of representations, which has been
given in the inner sense-is a process of change which is present-at-hand.
To have a determinate temporal character (Zeitbestimmtheit], however,
presupposes something present-at-hand which is permanent. But this
cannot be 'in us', 'for only through what is thus permanent can my

203

204

248
Being and Time
1. 6
Dasein in time be detennined' .xn Thus if changes which are present-athand have been posited empirically 'in me', it is necessary that along with
these something permanent which is present-at-hand should be posited
empirically 'outside ofme'. What is thus permanent is the condition which
makes it possible for the changes 'in me' to be present-at-hand. The
experience of the Being-in-time of representations posits something
changing 'in me' and something permanent 'outside of me', and it posits
both with equal primordiality.
Of course this proof is not a causal inference and is therefore not
encumbered with the disadvantages which that would imply. Kant gives,
as it were, an 'ontological proof' in terms of the idea of a temporal entity.
It seems at fust as if Kant bas given up the Cartesian approach ofpositing
a subject one can come across in isolation. But only in semblance. That
Kant demands any proof at aIl for the 'Dasein of Things outside of me'
shows a1ready that he takes the subject-the 'in me'-as the startingpoint for this problematic. Moreover, his proof itself is then carried
through by starting with the empirically given changes 'in me'. For only
'in me' is 'time' experienced, and time carries the burden of the proof.
Time provides the basis for leaping off into what is 'outside of me' in the
course of the proof. Furthermore, Kant emphasizes that "The problematical kind [of idealismJ, which mere1y alleges our inability to prove by
immediate experience that there is a Dasein outside ofour own, is reasonable and accords with a sound kind ofphilosophical thinking: name1y, to
permit no decisive judgment until an adequate proof has been found. "xiii
But even if the ontical priority of the isolated subject and inner experience should be given up, Descartes' position would still be retained
ontologically. What Kant proves-if we may suppose that his proof is
correct and correctly based-is that entities which are changing and
entities which are permanent are necessarily present-at-hand together.
But when two things which are present-at-hand are thus put on the same
leve1, this does not as yet mean that subject and Object are present-athand together. And even ifthis were proved, what is ontologically decisive
would still be covered up-name1y, the basic state of the 'subject', Dasein,
as Being-in-the-world. The Being-present-at-hand-together of the physical and
the psychical is completely different ontically and ontologically jrom the phenomenon
ofBeing-in-the-world.
Kant presupposes both the distinction between the 'in me' and the
'outside of me', and also the connection between these; factically he is correct
in doing so, but he is incorrect from the standpoint of the tendency of his
proof. It has not been demonstrated that the sort of thing which gets
established about the Being-present-at-hand-together of the changing and

J. 6
Beine and Time
249
the permanent when one takes time as one's clue, will also apply to the
connection between the 'in me' and the 'outside of me'. But if one were
to see the whole distinction between the 'inside' and the 'outside' and the
whole connection between them which Kant's proof presupposes, and if
one were to have an ontological conception of what has been presupposed
in this presupposition, then the possibility of holding that a proof of the
'Dasein of Things outside of me' is a necessary one which bas yet to be
given [noch ausstehendJ, would collapse.
The 'scandaI ofphilosophy' is not that this proofhas yet to be given, but
that such proofs are expected and attempted again and again. Such expectations,
aims, and demands arise from an ontologically inadequate way of starting
with something of such a cbaracter that independently of it and 'outside'
of it a 'world' is to be proved as present-at-hand. It is not that the proofs
are inadequate, but that the kind of Being of the entity which does the
proving and makes requests for proofs has not heen made definite enough. This
is why a demonstration that two things which are present-at-hand are
necessarily present-at-hand together, can give rise to the illusion that
something has been proved, or even can be proved, about Dasein as
Being-in-the-world. If Dasein is understood correctly, it defies such
proofs, because, in its Being, it a1ready is what subsequent proofs deem
necessary to demonstrate for it.
If one were to conclude that since the Being-present-at-hand of Things
outside of us is impossible to prove, it must therefore 'be taken mere1y on
jaith' ,xlv one would still fail to surmount this perversion of the problem.
The assumption would remain that at bottom and ideally it must still be
possible to carry out such a proof. This inappropriate way of approaching
the problem is still endorsed when one restricts onese1f to a 'faith in the
Reality of the external world', even if such a faith is explicitly 'acknowledged' as such. Although one is not offering astringent proof, one is
still in principle demanding a proof and trying to satisfy that demand.
Even if one should invoke the doctrine that the subject must presuppose
and indeed always does unconsciously presuppose the presence-at-hand
of the 'external world', one would still be starting with the construct of
an isolated subject. The phenomenon of Being-in-the-world is something
that one would no more meet in this way than one would by demonstrating that the physical and the psychical are present-at-hand together.
With such presuppositions, Dasein always comes 'too late'; for in so far
as it does this presupposing as an entity (and otherwise this would be
impossible), it is, as an entiD', already in a world. 'Earlier' than any presupposition which Dasein makes, or any of its ways of behaving, is the
'a priori' character of its state of Being as one whose kind of Being is care.

205

206

Being and Time
I. 6
To have faith in the Reality of the 'external world', whether rightlyor
wrongly; to "prove" this Reality for it, whether adequately or inadequately; to presuppose it, whether explicitlyor not-attempts such as these
which have not mastered theirown basis with full transparency, presuppose
a subject which is proximally worldless or unsure of its world, and which
must, at bottom, first assure itselfofa world. Thus from the very beginning,
Being-in-a-world is disposed to "take things" in sorne way [Auffassen], to
suppose, to be certain, to have faith-a way of behaving which itself is
always a founded mode of Being-in-the-world.
The 'problem ofReality' in the sense ofthe question whether an external
world is present-at-hand and whether such a world can be proved, turns
out to be an impossible one, not because its consequences lead to inextricable impasses, but because the very entity which serves as its theme, is
one which, as it were, repudiates any such formulation of the question.
Our task is not to prove that an 'external world' is present-at-hand or to
show how it is present-at-hand, but to point out why Dasein, as Being-inthe-world, has the tendency to bury the 'external world' in nullity
'epistemologically' before going on to prove it. 1 The reason for this lies
in Dasein's falling and in the way in which the primary understanding of
Being has been diverted to Being as presence-at-hand-a diversion which
is motivated by that falling itself. If one formulates the question 'critically'
with such an ontological orientation, then what one finds present-athand as proximally and solely certain, is something merely 'inner'. After
the primordial phenomenon of Being-in-the-world has been shattered,
the isolated subject is aIl that remains, and this becomes the basis on which
it gets joined together with a 'world'.
In this investigation we cannot discuss at length the many attempts to
solve the 'problem of Reality' which have been developed in various
kinds of realism and idealism and in positions which mediate between
them. Certaioly a grain of genuine inquiry is to be found in each of these;
but certain as this is, it would be just as perverse if one should want to
achieve a tenable solution of the problem by reckoning up how much
has been correct in each case. What is needed rather is the basic insight
that while the different epistemological directions which have been pursued have not gone so very far off epistemologically, their neglect of any
existential analytic of Dasein has kept them from obtaining any basis for
a weIl secured phenomenal problematic. Nor is such a basis to be obtained
by subsequently making phenomenological corrections on the concepts of
subject and consciousness. Such a procedure would give no guarantee
250

207

1'• • . warum das Dasein ais In-der-Welt-sein die Tendenz hat, die "Aussenwelt"
zunachst "erkenntnistheoretisch" in Nichtigkeit zu begraben um sie dann erst zu beweisen.'

J. 6

Being and Time
25 1
that the inappropriate formulation of the question would not continue
ta stand.
Along with Dasein as Being-in-the-world, entities within-the-world
have in each case already been disclosed. This existential-ontological
assertion seems to accord with the thesis of realism that the external world
is Really present-at-hand. In so far as this existential assertion does not
deny that entities within-the-world are present-at-hand, it agreesdoxographically, as it were-with the thesis of realism in its results. But
it differs in principle from every kind of realism; for realism holds that
the Reality of the 'world' not ooly needs to be proved but also is capable
of proof. In the existential assertion both of these positions are directly
negated. But what distinguishes this assertion from realism altogether, is
the fact that in realism there is a lack of ontological understanding.
Jndeed realism tries to explain Reality ontically by Real connections of
interaction between things that are Real.
As compared with realism, idealism, no matter how contrary and untenable it may be in its results, has an advantage in principle, provided that
it does not misunderstand itself as 'psychological' idealism. If idealism
emphasizes that Being and Reality are ooly 'in the consciousness', this
expresses an understanding of the fact that Being cannot be explained
through entities. But as long as idealism fails to clarify what this very
understanding of Being means ontologically, or how this understanding
is possible, or that it belongs to Dasein's state ofBeing, the Interpretation
of Reality which idealism constructs is an empty orie. Yet the fact that
Being cannot be explained through entities and that Reality is possible
ooly in the understanding of Being, does not absolve us from inquiring
into the Being of consciousness, of the res cogitans itself. If the idealist
thesis is to be followed consistently, the ontological analysis of consciousness itself is prescribed as an inevitable prior task. Ooly because Being is
'in the consciousness'-that is to say, ooly because it is understandable
in Dasein-ean Dasein also understand and conceptualize such characteristics of Being as independence, the 'in-itself', and Reality in general.
Ooly because of this are 'independent' entities, as encountered within-theworld, accessible to circumspection.
If what the term "idealism" says, amounts to the understanding that
Being can never be explained by entities but is already that which is
'transcendental' for every entity, then idealism affords the ooly correct
possibility for a philosophical problematic. If so, Aristotle was no less an
idealist than Kant. But if "idealism" signifies tracing back every entity
ta a subject or consciousness whose sole distinguishing features are that
it remains indefinite in its Being and is best characterized negatively as

208

Being and Time
I. 6
'un-Thing-like', then this idealism is no less naïve in its method than the
most grossly militant realism.
It is still possible that one may give the problematic of Reality priority
over any orientation in terms of 'standpoints' by maintaining the thesis
that every subject is what it is only for an Object, and vice versa. But in
this formalapproach the terms thus correlated-like the correlation itself
-remain ontologically indefinite. At the bottom, however, the whole
correlation necessarily gets thought of as 'somehow' being, and must
therefore be thought of with regard to sorne definite idea of Being. Of
course, if the existential-ontological basis has been made secure beforehand
by exhibiting Being-in-the-world, then this correlation is one that we can
know later as a formalized relation, ontologically undifferentiated.
Our discussion of the unexpressed presuppositions of attempts to solve
the problem of Reality in ways which are just 'epistemological', shows
that this problem must be taken back, as an ontological one, into the
existential analytic of Dasein. xv1
252

20g

(b) Reality as an Ontoiogicai Probiem
If the term "Reality" is meant to stand for the Being of entities presentat-hand within-the-world (res) (and nothing else is understood thereby),
then when it cornes to analysing this mode of Being, this signifies that
entities within-the-worid are ontologically conceivable only if the phenomenon of within-the-world-ness has been clarified. But within-the-worldness is based upon the phenomenon of the worid, which, for its part, as an
essential item in the structure of Being-in-the-world, belongs to the basic
constitution of Dasein. Being-in-the-world, in turn, is bound up ontologically in the structural totality of Dasein's Being, and we have characterized care as such a totality. But in this way we have marked out the
foundations and the horizons which must be clarified if an analysis of
Reality is to be possible. Only in this connection, moreover, does the
character of the "in-itself" become ontologically intelligible. By taking
our orientation from this context of problems, we have in our earlier
analyses Interpreted the Being of entities within-the-world. xvu
To be sure, the Reality of the Real can be characterized phenomenologically within certain limits without any explicit existential-ontological
basis. This is what Dilthey has attempted in the article mentioned above.
He holds that the Real gets experienced in impulse and will, and that
Reality is resistance, or, more exactly, the character of resisting. 1 He then
works out the phenomenon of resistance analytically. This is the positive
contribution of his article, and provides the best concrete substantiation
l

'Realitiit ist Widerstand, genauer Widerstiindigkeit.'

1. 6

Being and Time
253
for his idea of a 'psychology which both describes and dissects'. But he is
kept from working out the analysis of this phenomenon correctly by the
epistemological problematic of Reality. The 'principle of phenomenality'
does not enable him to come to an ontological Interpretation of the Being
of consciousness. 'Within the same consciousness,' he writes, 'the will and
its inhibition emerge.'xVUI What kind of Being belongs to this 'emerging'?
What is the meaning of the Being of the 'within'? What relationship-ofBeing does consciousness bear to the Real itself? AlI this must be determined ontologically. That this has not been done, depends ultimately on
the fact that Dilthey has left 'life' standing in such a manner that it is
ontologically undifferentiated; and of course 'life' is something which one
cannot go back 'behind'. But to Interpret Dasein ontologically does not
signify that we must go back ontically to sorne other entity. The fact that
Dilthey has been refuted epistemologically cannot prevent us from making
fruitful use of what is positive in his analyses-the very thing that has not
been understood in such refutations.
Thus Scheler has recently taken up Dilthey's Interpretation of Reality.x1x He stands for a 'voluntative theory of Dasein'. Here "Dasein"
is understood in the Kantian sense as Being-present-at-hand. The 'Being
of objects is given immediately only in the way it is related to drive and
will'. Scheler not only emphasizes, as does Dilthey, that Reality is never
primarily given in thinking and apprehending; he also points out particularly that cognition [Erkennen] itselfis notjudgment, and that knowing
[Wissen] is a 'relationship of Being'.
What we have already said about the ontological indefiniteness of
Dilthey's foundations holds in principle for this theory too. Nor can the
fundamental ontological analysis of 'life' be slipped in afterwards as a
substructure. Such a fundamental analysis provides the supporting conditions for the analysis ofReality-for the entire explication of the character
of resisting and its phenomenal presuppositions. Resistance is encountered in a not-coming-through, and it is encountered as a hindrance to
willing to come through. With such willing, however, something must
already have been disclosed which one's drive and one's will are out for.
But what they are out for is ontically indefinite, and this indefiniteness
must not be overlooked ontologically or taken as if it were nothing. When
Being-out-for-something cornes up against resistance, and can do nothing
but 'come up against it', it is itself already aiongside a totality of involvements. But the fact that this totality has been discovered is grounded in
the disclosedness of the referential totality of signifièance. The experiencing
of resistance-that is, the discovery of what is resistant to o~' s endeavours-is possihle ontoiogicailJ onlJ by reason of the disclosedness of the Worid. The character

210

211

254
Being and Time
I. 6
of resisting is one that belongs to entities with-the-world. Factically,
experiences of resistance determine only the extent and the direction in
which entities encountered within-the-world are discovered. The summation of such experiences does not introduce the disclosure of the world
for the first time, but presupposes it. The 'against' and the 'counter to'
as ontological possibilities, are supported by disclosed Being-in-the-world.
Nor is resistance experienced in a drive or will which 'emerges' in its
own right. These both turn out to be modifications of care. Only entities
with this kind of Being can come up against something resistant as something within-the-world. So if "Reality" gets defined as "the character of
resisting", we must notice two things: first, that this is only one character
of Reality among others; second, that the character of resisting presupposes necessarily a world which has already been disclosed. Resistance
characterizes the 'external world' in the sense of entities within-the-world,
but never in the sense of the world itself. 'Consciousness of Reality' is itself
a way of Being-in-the-worlcl. Every 'problematic of the external world' cornes
back necessarily to this basic existential phenomenon.
If the 'cogito sum' is to serve as the point of departure for the existential
analytic of Dasein, then it needs to be turned around, andfurthermore its
content needs new ontologico-phenomenal confirmation. The 'sum' is then
asserted first, and indeed in the sense that "1 am in a world". As such an
entity, '1 am' in the possibility ofBeing towards various ways ofcomporting
myself-namely, cogitationes-as ways of Being alongside entities withinthe-world. Descartes, on the contrary, says that cogitationes are present-athand, and that in these an ego is present-at-hand too as a ~orldless res
cogitans.
(c) Reality andCare
"Reality", as an ontological term, is one which we have related to
entities within-the-world. If it serves to designate this kind of Being in
general, then readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand function as modes
of Reality. If, however, one lets this world have its traditional signification,
then it stands for Being in the sense of the pure presence-at-hand of
Things. But not all presence-at-hand is the presence-at-hand of Things.
The 'Nature' by which we are 'surrounded' is, ofcourse, an entity withinthe-world; but the kind of Being which it shows belongs neither to the
ready-to-hand nor to what is present-at-hand as 'Things of Nature'. No
matter how this Being of 'Nature' may be Interpreted, ail the modes of
Being of entities within-the-world are founded ontologically upon the
worldhood of the world, and accordingly upon the phenomenon of Beingin-the world. From this there arises the insight that among the modes of

I. 6
Being and Time
255
Being of entities within-the-world, Reality has no priority, and that
Reality is a kind of Being which cannot even characterize anything like
the world or Dasein in a way which is ontologically appropriate.
ln the order of the ways in which things are connected in their ontological foundations and in the order of any possible categorial and
existential demonstration, Reality is referred back to the phenomenon of care.
But the fact that Reality is ontologically grounded in the Being ofDasein,
does not signify that only when Dasein exists and as long as Dasein exists,
can the Real be as that which in itself it is.
Of course only as long as Dasein is (that is, only as long as an understanding of Being is ontically possible), ois there' Being. 1 When Dasein
does not exist, 'independence' ois' not either, nor ois' the 'in-itself'. In
such a case this sort of thing can be neither understood nor not understood. In such a case even entities within-the-world can neither be discovered nor lie hidden. In such a case it cannot be said that entities are,
nor can it be said that they are not. But now; as long as there is an understanding of Being and therefore an understanding of presence-at-hand,
it can indeed be said that in this case entities will still continue to be.
As we have noted, Being (not entities) is dependent upon the understanding ofBeing; that is to say, Reality (not the Real) is dependent upon
care. By this dependency our further analytic of Dasein is held secure in
the face of an uncritical Interpretation which nevertheless keeps urging
itself upon us-an Interpretation in which the idea of Reality is taken as
the clue to Dasein. Gnly if we take our orientation from existentiality as
Interpreted in an ontologicaUy positive manner, can we have any guarantee that in the factical course of the analysis of 'consciousness' or of
'life', sorne sense of "Reality" does not get made basic, even if it is one
which has not been further differentiated.
Entities with Dasein's kind of Being cannot'be conceived in terms of
Reality and substantiality; we have expressed this by the thesis that the
substance of man is existence. Yet if we have Interpreted existentiality as care,
and distinguished this from Reality, this does not signify that our existential analytic is at an end; we have merely allowed the intricate problems
of the question of Being and its possible modes, and the question of the
meaning ofsuch modifications, to emerge more sharply: only if the understanding of Being is, do entities as entities become accessible; only if
l '• • • "gibt es" Sein.' In his letter Ober den Humanismus (Klostermann, Frankfurt
A.M., n.d., p. 22, reprinted from Platons LehTe von der Wahrheit, Francke A.G., Bern, 1947),
Heidegger insists that the expression 'es gibt' is here used deliberately, and should be
taken literally as 'it gives'. He writes: 'For the "it" which here "gives" is Being itself.
The "gives" however, designates the essence of Being, which gives and which confers its
truth.' He adds that the 'es gibt' is used to avoid writing that 'Being is', for the verb 'is'
is appropriate to entities but not to Being itself.

212

256
Being and Time
I. 6
entities are of Dasein's kind of Being is the understanding of Being possible as an entity.
~ 44. Dasein, Diselosedness, and Truth

213

From time immemorial, philosophy has associated truth and Being.
Parmenides was the fust to discover the Being of entities, and he 'identified' Being with the perceptive understandmg of Being: 'Td ytlp aÙ'Td voâv
~CfTlv 'T€ Ka~€tva'.xx Aristotle, in ou~ning the history ofhow the dpXal have
been uncovered, xx1 emphasizes that the philosophers before him, under the
guidance of 'the things themselves' have been compelIed to inquire
further: aÙ'Td 'Td 1Tpâyp,a c1Jôo1Tol"1l1€V aÙ'Tois Ka~ l1Vv"1vaYKal1€ '''1'T€iv. xxU
He is describing thesame factwhen he says thatdvaYKa'ôp,€Vos Ô'dKOÀov8€îv
'ToiS' cPawop,lvo,sJtXl1i.-that he (Parmenides) was compelIed to folIow
that which showed itself in itself: ln another passage he remarks that these
thinkers carried on their researches {m' aÙ'Tfjs 'Tfjs dÀ"18€laS' d.vaYKa'ÔP,€VO,xxlv-"compelIed by the 'truth' itself". Aristotle describes these
researches as cP'ÀOl1ocPûv 1T€P~ 'Tfjs clÀ"18€lasXXV-" 'philosophizing' about
the 'truth' "--or even as d1T0cPalv€118a, 1T€P~ 'Tfjs dÀ"18€lasXXVi.-as exhibiting something and letting it be seen with regard to the 'truth'
and within the range ofthe 'truth'. Philosophy itselfis defined as ~mCfT7]P,"1
'Tfjs d.À"18€lasXXVli.-"the science of the 'truth' ". But it is also characterized as lmCfT~P,"1, ~ 8€wp€î 'Td r1v r1v=v U i.- as "a science which contemplates entities as entities"-that is, with regard to their Being.
What is signified here by 'carrying on researches into the "truth" "
by "science of the 'truth' "? ln such researches is 'truth' made a theme as
it would be in a theory of knowledge or ofjudgment? Manifestly not, for
'truth' signifies the same as 'thing' ["Sache"], 'something that shows
itself'. But what then does the expression 'truth' signify if it can be used
as a term for 'entity' and 'Being'?
If, however, truth rightfully has a primordial connection with Being,
then the phenomenon of truth comes within the range of the problematic of fundamental ontology. In that case, must not this phenomenon
have been encountered already within our preparatory fundamental
analysis, the analytic of Dasein? What ontico-ontological connection
does 'truth' have with Dasein and with that ontical characteristic of
Dasein which we calI the "understanding ofBeing"? Can the reason why
Being necessarily goes together with truth and vice versa be pointed out
in terms of such understanding?
These questions are not to be evaded. Because Being does indeed 'go
together' with truth, the phenomenon of truth has already been one of the
themes of our earlier analyses, though not explicitly under tbis title. In

n

1. 6

Being and Time
257
giving precision to the problem of Being, it is now time to delimit the
phenomenon oftruth explicitly and to fix the problems which it comprises.
ln doing this, we should not just take together what we have previously
taken apart. Our investigation requires a new approach.
Our analysis takes its departure from the traditional conception of truth,
and attempts to lay bare the ontological foundations of that conception
(a). In terms of these foundations the primordial phenomenon of truth
becomes visible. We can then exhibit the way in which the traditional
conception of truth has been derived from this phenomenon (b). <Dur
investigation will make it plain that to the question of the 'essence" of
truth, there belongs necessarily the question of the kind of Being which
truth possesses. Together with this we must c1arify the ontological meaning
of the kind of talk in which we say that 'there is truth', and we must
also c1arify the kind of necessity with which 'we must presuppose' that
'there is' truth (e).
(a) The Traditional Conception of Truth, and ils Ontological Foundations
There are three theses which characterize the way in which the essence
of truth has been traditionally taken and the way it is supposed to have
been fust defined: (1) that the 'locus' of truth is assertion (judgment);
(2) that the essence of truth lies in the 'agreement' of th~ judgment with
its object; (3) that Aristotle, the father of logic, not only has assigned
truth to the judgment as its primordial locus but has set going the definition of "truth" as 'agreement'. 1
Here it is not our aim to provide a history of the concept oftruth, which
could be presented only on the basis of a history of ontology. We shalI
introduce our analytieal discussions by alluding to some familiar matters.
Aristotle says that the 1Ta87]p,a-ra 'Tfjs ifivxfjS' are 'TWV 1Tpayp,a'Twv op,o"wp,a'TaxxUL-that the soul's 'Experiences', its vo~p,a'Ta ('representations'),
are likenings of Things. This assertion, which is by no means proposed as
an explicit definition of the essence of truth, has also given occasion for
developing the later formulation of the essence of truth 'as adaequatio
inteUeetus et rei. 2 Thomas Aquinas,xxx who refers this definition to Avicenna
(who, in turn, has taken it over from Isaac Israeli's tenth-century 'Book of
Definitions') also uses for "adaequatio" (likening) the terms "correspondentia"
("correspondence") and "eonvenientia" (" coming together").
1 Here we follow the oider editions in reading '... hat sowohi die Wahrheit dem Urteil
aIs ihrem ursprünglichen Ort zugewiesen aIs auch die Definition der Wahrheit als
"Ubereinstimmung" in Gang gebracht.' The newer editions read
hat sowohi •.
zugewiesen, er hat auch
2' This is usually translated as 'adequation of the intellect and the thing'o Heidegger
makes the connection seem doser by translating both the Latin adaequatio and the Greek
oJLolwJLa by the word 'Angieichung', which we have somewhat arbitrarily translated as
'likening'.
'0

0

•

.'

0

•

0

21 4

215

216

258
Being and Time
I. 6
The neo-Kantian epistemology of the nineteenth century often characterized this definition of "truth" as an expression of a methodologically
retarded naïve realism, and dec1ared it to be irreconcilable with any
formulation of this question which has undergone Kant's 'Copernican
revolution'. But Kant too adhered to this conception of truth, so much so
that he did not even bring it up for discussion; this has been overlooked,
though Brentano has already called our attentiLn to it. 'The old and
celebrated question with which it was supposed that one might drive the
logicians into a corner is this: "what is truth?" The explanation of the
name of truth-namely, that it is the agreement of knowledge with its
object-will here be granted and presupposed .. ,'xxxi.
'Iftruth consists in the agreement ofknowledge with its object, then this
object must thus be distinguished from others; for knowledge is false ifit
does not agree with the object to which it is related, even if it should
contain something which might weIl be valid for other objects,'XXXU And
in the introduction to the "Transcendental Dialectic" Kant states: 'Truth
and illusion are not in the object so far as it is intuited, but in the judgment about it so far as it is thought.'xxxiU
Of course this characterization of truth as 'agreement', adaequatio,
&p.olwcns, is very general and empty. Yet it will still have sorne justification if it can hold its own without prejudice to any of the most various
Interpretations which that distinctive predicate "knowledge" will support.
We are now inquiring into the foundations of this 'relation'. What else is
tacitly positerI in this relational totality of the adaequatio inteliectus et rei?
And what ontological character rIoes that which is thus posited have itself?
What in general does one have in view when one uses the term 'agreement'? The agreement of something with something has the formaI
character of.a relation of something to something. Every agreement, and
therefore 'truth' as weIl, is a relation. But not every relation is an agreement. A sign points al what is indicated. 1 Such indicating is a relation,
but not an agreement of the sign with what is indicated. Yet manifestly
not every agreement is a convenientia of the kind that is fixed upon in the
definition of "truth". The number "6" agrees with "16 minus 10". These
numbers agree; they are equal with regard to the question of "how
much ?" Equality is one way ofagreeing. Its structure is such that something
like a 'with-regard-to' belongs to it. In the arIaequatio something gets
related; what is that with regard to which it agrees? In c1arifying the
'truth-relation' we must notice also what is peculiar to the terms of this
relation. With regard to what do intellectus and res agree? In their kind of
Being and their essential content do they give us anything at aIl with
l

'Ein Zeichen zeigt au! das Gezeigte.'

J. 6
Being and Time
259
regard to which they can agree? If it is impossible for intellectus and res to
be equal because they are not of the same species, are they then perhaps
similar? But knowledge is still supposed to 'give' the thing just as it is.
This 'agreement' has the Relational character of the 'just as' ["SoWie"]. In what way is this relation possible as a relation between intellectus
and res? From these questions it becomes plain that to c1arify the structure
oftruth it is not enough simply to presuppose this relational totality, but
we must go back and inquire into the context of Being which provides
the support for this totality as such.
Must we, however, bring up here the 'epistemological' problematic as
regards the subject-Object relation, or can our analysis restrict itself to
Jnterpreting the 'immanent consciousness of truth', and thus remain
'within the sphere' of the subject? According to the general opinion, what
is true is knowledge. But knowledge is judging. In judgment one must
distinguish between thejudging as a Real psychical process, and that which
is judged, as an irIeal content. It will be said of the latter that it is 'true'.
The Real psychical process, however, is either present-at-hand or not.
According to this opinion, the ideal content of judgment stands in a
relationship of agreement. This relationship thus pertains to a connection
between an ideal content ofjudgment and the Real Thing as that which
is judged about. Is this agreement Real or ideal in its kind of Being, or
neither of these? How are we to take ontologically the relation between an ideal
entity and something that is Real and present-at-hand? Such a relation indeed
subsists [besteht]; and in factical judgments it subsists not on1y as a relation between the content of judgment and the Real Object, but likewise
as a relation between the ideal content and the Real act of judgment.
And does it manifestly subsist 'more inwardly' in this latter case?
Or is the ontological meaning of the relation between Real and ideal
(p.18€g,s) something about which we must not inquire? Yet the
relation is to be one which subsists. What does such "subsisting" [Bestand] mean ontologically?
Why should this not be a legitimate question? Is it accidentaI that no
headway has been madewith this problem in over two thousand years? Has
the question already been perverted in theverywayit has been approached
-in the ontologically unc1arified separation of the Real and the ideal?
And with regard to the 'actual' judging ofwhat isjudged, is the separation of the Real act ofjudgment from the ideal content altogether unjustified? Does not the actuality of knowing and judging get broken asunder
into two ways of Being-two 'levels' whi<;h can never be pieced together
in such a manner as to reach the kind of Being that belongs to knowing?
Is not psychologism correct in holding out against this separation, even

217

218

260
Being and Time
I. 6
if it neither clarifies ontologically the kind of Being which belongs to the
thinking of that which is thought, nor is even so much as acquainted with
it as a problem?
If we go back to the distinction between the act of judgment and its
content, we shall not advance our discussion of the question of the kind
of Being which belongs to the adaequatio; we shall only J1lake plain the
indispensability ofclarifying the kind ofBeing which belongs to knowledge
itself. In the analysis which this necessitates we must at the same time try
to bring into view a phenomenon which is characteristic of knowledgethe phenomenon of truth. When does truth become phenomenally explicit
in knowledge itself? It does so when such knowing demonstrates itself as
true. By demonstrating itself it is assured of its truth. Thus in the phenomenal context of demonstration, the relationship of agreement must
become visible.
Let us suppose that someone with his back turned to the wall makes
the true assertion that 'the picture on the wall is hanging askew.' This
assertion demonstrates itself when the man who makes it, turns round
and perceives the picture hanging askew on the wall. What gets demonstrated in this demonstration? What is the meaning of "confirming"
[Bewahrung] such an assertion? Do we, let us say, ascertain some agreement between our 'knowledge' or 'what is known' and the Thing on the
wall? Yes and no, depending upon whether our Interpretation of the.
expression 'what is known' is phenomenally appropriate. If he who makes
the assertion judges without perceiving the picture, but 'merely represents' it to himself, to what is he related? To 'representations', shall we
say? Certainly not, if "representation" is here supposed to signify representing, as a psychical process. Nor is he related to "representations" in
the sense of what is thus "represented," if what we have in mind here is
a 'picture' of that Real Thing which is on the wall. 1 The asserting which
'merely represents' is related rather, in that sense which is most its own,
to the Real picture on the wall. What one has in mind is the Real picture,
and nothing else. Any Interpretation in which something else is here
slipped in as what one supposedly has in mind in an assertion that merely
represents, belies the phenomenal facts of the case as to that about which
the assertion gets made. Asserting is a way of Being towards the Thing
itself that is. 2 And what does one's perceiving of it demonstrate? Nothing

l'Er ist auch nicht aufVorstellungen bezogen im Sinne des Vorgestellten, sofem damit
gemeint wird ein "BiId" von dem reaien Ding an der Wand.' While we fol1ow tradition in
translating 'Vorstellung' as 'representation', the literai meaning is somewhat doser to
'putting before us'. In this sense our 'picture' or 'image' ('Bild') of the actuaI picture
('Bild') on the wall, is itself something which we have 'put before us' and which is thus
'vorgestellt', though in English we would hardly calI it 'that which we represent'.
2 'Das Aussagen ist ein Sein zum seienden Ding selbst.'

J.6
Being and Time
261
else than that this Thing is the very entity which one has in mind in one's
assertion. What comes up for confirmation is that this entity is pointed
out by the Being in which the assertion is made-which is Being towards
what is put forward in the assertion; thus what is to be confirmed is that
such Being uncovers the entity towards which it is. What gets demonstrated
is the Being-uncovering of the assertion.! ln carrying out such a demonstration, the knowing remains related solely to the entity itself. In this
entity the confirmation, as it were, gets enacted. The entity itself which
one has in mind shows itself just as it is in itself; that is to say, it shows
that it, in its selfsameness, is just as it gets pointed out in the assertion as
being-just as it gets uncovered as being. Representations do not get
compared, either among themselves or in relation to the Real Thing.
What is to be demonstrated is not an agreement of knowing with its
object, still less of the psychical with the physical; but neither is it an
agreement between 'contents of consciousness' among themselves. What
is to be demonstrated is solely the Being-uncovered [Entdeckt-sein] of the
entity itself-that entiry in the "how" of its uncoveredness. This uncoveredness is conf1rmed when that which is put forward in the assertion (namely
the entity itself) shows itseIf as that very same thing. "Confirmation" signifies
the entïry's showing itself in its selfsameness. xxxiv The confirmation is accomplished on the basis of the entity's showing itself. This is possible only in
such a way that the knowing which asserts and which gets conflrmed is,
in its ontological meaning, itself a Being towarris Real entities, and a Being
that uncovers.
To say that an assertion "is true" signifies that it uncovers the entity as
it is in itself. Such an assertion asserts, points out, 'lets' the entity 'be seen'
(&:rroepavcns) in its uncoveredness. The Being-true (truth) of the assertion
must be understood as Being-uncovering*. Thus truth has by no means the
structure of an agreement between knowing and the object in the sense
of a likening of one entity (the subject) to another (the übject).
Being-true as Being-uncovering*, is in turn ontologically possible only
on the basis of Being-in-the-world. This latter phenomenon, which we
have known as a basic state of Dasein, is thefoundation for the primordial
phenomenon oftruth. We shall now follow this up more penetratingly.
l'Ausgewiesen wird das Entdeckend-sein der Aussage.' Here and in the following
pages we find the expression 'Entdeckend-sein' consistently printed with a hyphen in the
'more recent editions. In the older editions it is written sometimes as one word, sometimes
as two, and it is hyphenated only at the ends of lines. In both editions we sometimes find
this word printed with a lower-case initial. We have marked such cases with an asterisk;
for while we prefer the translation 'Being-uncovering' in such cases, the lower-case initia
suggests that 'to-be-uncovering' may be a better reading.

219

Being and Time
I. 6
(b) The Primordial Phenomenon of Truth and the Derivative Character of the
Traditional Corueption of Truth
"Being-true" ("truth") means Being-uncovering*. But is not this a
highly arbitrary way to define "truth"? By such drastic ways of defining
this concept we may succeed in eliminating the idea of agreement from
the conception oftruth. Must we not pay for this dubious gain by plunging
the 'good' old tradition into nullity? But while our definition is seemingly
arbitrary, it contains only the necessary Interpretation of what was primordially surmised in the oldest tradition of ancient philosophy and even
understood in a pre-phenomenological manner. If a ÀOYos as à7Toq,avu,s
is to be true, its Being-true is àÀ7J8w€w in the manner of à7Toq,atvEu8a,
-of taking entities out of their hiddenness and letting them be seen in
their unhiddenness (their uncoveredness). The àÀ~8Ha which Aristotle
equates with 7TpâYJLa and q,awoJL€Va in the passages cited above, signifies
the 'things themselves'; it signifies what shows itself-entities in the "how"
of their uruoveredness. And is it accidentaI that in one of the fragments of
HeracleitusXXXV-the oldest fragments of philosophical doctrine in which
the ÀOyos is explicitly handled-the phenomenon of truth in the sense of
uncoveredness (unhiddenness), as we have set it forth, shows through?
Those who are lacking in understanding are contrasted with the ÀOYos,
and also with him who speaks that Àoyos, and understands it. The ÀOYos
is q,pa'wv ~7TWS ÉXH: it tells how entities comport themselves. But to
those who are lacking in understanding, what they do remains hidden
-ÀaIl8av€,. They forget it (ÈmÀav8avoVTa'); that is, for them it
sinks back into hiddenness. Thus to the ÀOYos belongs unhiddennessà-À~8Ha. To translate this word. as 'truth', and, above all, to define
this expression conceptually in theoretical ways, is to coyer up the meaning of what the Greeks made 'self-evidently' basic for the terminological
use of àÀ~8Ha as a pre-philosophical way ofunderstanding it.
In citing such evidence we must avoid uninhibited word-mysticism.
Nevertheless, the ultimate business of philosophy is to preserve the force
of the most elemental words in which Dasein expresses itself, and to keep the
common understanding from levelling them off to that unintelligibility
which functions in turn as a source of pseudo-problems.
We have now given a phenomenal demonstration ofwhat we set forth
earlierxxxvi as to Àoyos and àÀ~8Ha in, so to speak, a dogmatic Interpretation. In proposing our 'definition' of "truth" we have not shaken off
the tradition, but we have appropriated it primordially; and we shaU have
done so aU the more if we succeed in demonstrating that the idea of
agreement is one to which theory had to come on the basis of the primordial phenomenon of truth, and if we can show how this came about.
262

220

I. 6
Being and Time
263
Moreover, the 'definition' of "truth" as "uncoveredness" and as
"Being-uncovering", it not a mere explanation of a word. Among those
ways in which Dasein comports itself there are sorne which we are accustomed in the first instance to caU 'true'; from the analysis of these our
definition emerges.
Being-true as Being-uncovering*, is a way of Being for Dasein. What
makes this very uncovering possible must necessarily be called 'true' in
a still more primordial sense. The most primordial phenomenon of truth is first
shown by the existential-ontological foundations of uruovering.
Uncovering is a way of Being for Being-in-the-world. Circumspective
concern, or even that concern in which we tarry and look at something,
uncovers entities within-the-world. These entities become that which has
been uncovered. They are 'true' in a second sense. What is primarily
'true'-that is, uncovering-is Dasein. "Truth" in the second sense does
not mean Being-uncovering* (uncovering), but Being-uncovered (uncoveredness) .
Our earlier analysis ofthe worldhood of the world and ofentities withinthe-world has shown, however, that the uncoveredness of entities withinthe-world is grounded in the world's disclosedness. But disclosedness is that
basic character ofDasein according to which it is its "there". Disclosedness
is constituted by state-of-mind, understanding, and discourse, and pertains
equiprimordially to the world, to Being-in, and to the Self. In its very
structure, care is. ahead of itseif-Being already in a world-as Being
alongside entities within-the-world; and in this structure the disclosedness
of Dasein lies hidden. With and through it is uncoveredness;l hence only
with Dasein's disclosedness is the most primordial phenomenon of truth
attained. What we have pointed out earlier with regard to the existential
Constitution of the "there"xxxvll and in relation to the everyday Being
of the "there" ,xxxv111 pertains to the most primordial phenomenon of
truth, nothing less. In so far as Dasein is its disclosedness essentiaUy, and
discloses and uncovers as something disclosed to this extent it is essentially 'true'. Dasein is 'in the truth'. This assertion has meaning ontologically.
It does not purport to say that onticaUy Dasein is introduced 'to aU the
truth' either always or just in every case, but rather that the disclosedness
of its ownmost Being belongs to its existential constitution.
If we accept the results we have obtained earlier, the full existential
meaning of the principle that 'Dasein is in the truth' can be restored by
the following considerations:
l 'Mit und durch sie ist Entdecktheit .. .' Our version reflects the ambiguity of the
German, which leaves the grammatical function of the pronoun 'sie' obscure and permits
it to refer either to 'the disclosedness of Dasein', to 'care', or-perhaps most like1y-to
'the structure of care'.

221

264
Being and Time
I. 6
(1) To Dasein's state of Being, disclosedness in general essentially be1ongs.
It embraces the whole of that structure-of-Being which has become
explicit through the phenomenon of care. To care be10ngs not only Beingin-the-world but also Being alongside entities within-the-world. The
uncoveredness of such entities is equiprimordial with the Being of Dasein
and its disclosedness.
(2) To Dasein's state ofBeing be10ngs thrownness; indeed it is constitutive
for Dasein's disclosedness. In thrownness is revealed that in each case
Dasein, as my Dasein and this Dasein, is already in a definite world and
alongside a definite range of definite entities within-the-world. 1 Dis·
closedness is essentially factical.
(3) To Dasein's state of Being belongs projection-disclosive Being towards its potentiality-for-Being. As something that understands, Dasein
can understand itseif in terms of the 'world' and Others or in terms of its
ownmost potentiality-for-Being. 2 The possibility just mentioned means
that Dasein discloses itse1f to itself in and as its ownmost potentiality-for
Being. This autkentic disclosedness shows the phenomenon of the most
primordial truth in the mode of authenticity. The most primordial, and
indeed the most authentic, disclosedness in which Dasein, as a potentiality-for-Being, can be, is the truth of existence. This becomes existentially
and ontologically definite only in connection with the analysis ofDasein's
authenticity.
(4) To Dasein's state of Being belongs falling. Proximally and for the
most part Dasein is lost in its 'world'. Its understanding, as a projection
upon possibilities ofBeing, has diverted itselfthither. Its absorption in the
"they" signifies that it is dominated by the way things are publicly
interpreted. That which has been uncovered and disclosed stands in a
mode in which it has been disguised and closed off by idle talk, curiosity,
and ambiguity. Being towards entities has not been extinguished, but it
has been uprooted. Entities have not been complete1y hidden; they are
precise1y the sort of thing that has been uncovered, but at the same time
they have been disguised. They show themse1ves, but in the mode of
semblance. Likewise what has formerly been uncovered sinks back again,
hidden and disguised. Because Dasein is essentially falling, its state of Being is
such that it is in 'untruth'. This term, like the expression 'falling', is here
used ontologically. If we are to use it in existential analysis, we must
1

222

l'In ihr enthüllt sich, dass Dasein je schon als meines und dieses in einer bestimmten
Welt und bei einem bestimmten Umkreis von bestimmten innerweltlichen Seienden ist.'
il ' ••• der Entwurf: das erschliessende Sein zu seinem Seinkiinnen. Dasein kann sich ais
verstehendes aus der "Welt" und den Anderen her verstehen oder aus seinem eigensten
Seinkiinnen.' The earlier editions have a full stop after 'Entwurf' rather than a colon, and
introduce 'das' with a capital. The grammatical function of 'ais versteheodes' seems
ambiguous.

Being and Time
265
avoid giving it any ontically negative 'evaluation'. To be closed off and
covered up be10ngs to Dasein's facticity. In its full existential-ontological
meaning, the proposition that 'Dasein is in the truth' states equiprimordially that 'Dasein is in untruth'. But only in so far as Dasein'has been
disclosed has it also been closed off; and only in so far as entities withinthe-world have been uncovered along with Dasein, have such entities,
as possibly encounterable within-the-world, been covered up (hidden) or
disguised.
It is therefore essential that Dasein should explicitly appropriate what
has already been uncovered, defend it against semblance and disguise, and
assure itself of its uncoveredness again and again. The uncovering of
anything new is never done on the basis of having something complete1y
hidden, but takes its departure rather from uncoveredness in the mode of
semblance. Entities look as if •.. That is, they have, in a certain way,
been uncovered already, and yet they are still disguised.
Truth (uncoveredness) is something that must always first be wrested
from entities. Entities get snatched out of their hiddenness. The factical
uncoveredness of anything is always, as it were, a kind of robbery. Is it
accidentaI that when the Greeks express themse1ves as to the essence of
truth, they use a privative expression-à-À~8€«I? When Dasein so expresses
itself, does not a primordial understanding of its own Being thus make
itself known-the understanding (even if it is only pre-ontological) that
Being-in-untruth makes up an essential characteristic of Being-in-the
world?
The goddess of Truth who guides Parmenides, puts two pathways
before him, one of uncovering, one of hiding; but this signifies nothing
else than that Dasein is already both in the truth and in untruth. The way
ofuncovering is achieved only in Kplv€LV Àoyep-in distinguishing between
these understandingly, and making one's decision for the one rather
than the other. XXJdx
The existential-ontological condition for the fact that Being-in-theworld is characterized by 'truth' and 'untruth', lies in that state ofDasein's
Being which we have designated as thrown projection. This is something that
is constitutive for the structure ofcare.
The upshot of our existential-ontological Interpretation of the phenomenon of truth is (1) that truth, in the most primordial sense, is Dasein's
disclosedness, to which the uncoveredness of entities within-the-world
be1ongs; and (2) that Dasein is equiprimordially both in the truth and in
untruth.
Within the horizon of the traditional Interpretation of the phenomenon
of truth, our insight into these principles will not be complete until it can

1. 6

223

224

266
Being and Time
1. 6
be shown: (1) that truth, understood as agreement, originates from disclosedness by way of definite modification; (2) that the kind of Being
which belongs to disclosedness itselfis such that its derivative modification
first cornes into view and leads the way for the theoretical explication of
the structure oftruth.
Assertion and its structure (namely, the apophantical "as") are founded
upon interpretation and its structure (viz, the hermeneutical "as") and
also upon understanding-upon Dasein's disclosedness. Truth, however,
is regarded as a distinctive character of assertion as so derived. Thus the
roots of the truth of assertion reach back to the disclosedness of the understanding. xl But over and above these indications of how the truth of
assertion has originated, the phenomenon of agreement must not be
exhibited explicitly in its derivative character.
Our Being alongside entities within-the-world is concern, and this is
Being which uncovers. To Dasein's disclosedness, however, discourse
belongs essentially.xll Dasein expresses itself [spricht sich aus] : it expresses
itself as a Being-towards entities-a Being-towards which uncovers. And
in assertion it expresses itself as such about entities which have been
uncovered. Assertion communicates entities in the "how" of their uncoveredness. When Dasein is aware of the communication, it brings itself
in its awareness into an uncovering Being-towards the entities discussed.
The assertion which is expressed is about something, and in what it is
about [in ihrem Worüber] it contains the uncoveredness ofthese entities.
This uncoveredness is preserved in what is expressed. What is expressed
becomes, as it were, something ready-to-hand within-the-world which can
be taken up and spoken again. 1 Because the uncoveredness has been
preserved, that which is expressed (which thus is ready-to-hand) has in
itself a relation to any entities about which it is, an assertion. Any uncoveredness is an uncoveredness of something. Even when Dasein speaks
over again what someone else has said, it cornes into a Being-towards the
very entities which have been discussed. 3 But it has been exempted from
having to uncover them again, primordially, and it holds that it has
been thus exempted.
Dasein need not bring itself face to face with entities themselves in an
'original' experience; but it nevertheless remains in a Being-towards these
entities. In a large measure uncoveredness gets appropriated not by one's
own uncovering, but rather by hearsay of something that has been said.
l 'Das Ausgesprochene wird gleichsam zu einem innerweldich Zuhandenen, das
aufgenommen und weitergesprochen werden kann.' While we have"followed our usual
palicy in translating 'das Ausgesprochene' as 'what is expressed', it might perhaps be
translated as 'that which is spoken out', 'the utterance', or even 'the pronouncement'.
2 "Auch im Nachsprechen kommt das nachsprechende Dasein in ein Sein zum besprochenen Seienden selbst.'

I. 6
Being and Time
267
Absorption in something that has been said belongs to the kind of Being
which the "they" possesses. That which has been expressed as such takes
over Being-towards those entities which have been uncovered in the assertion. If, however, these entities are to be appropriated explicitly with
regard to their uncoveredness, this amounts to saying that the assertion
is to be demonstrated as one that uncovers. But the assertion expressed is
something ready-to-hand, and indeed in such a way that, as something
by which uncoveredness is preserved, it has in itself a relation to the
entities uncovered. Now to demonstrate that it is something which
uncovers [ihres Entdeckend-seins] means to demonstrate how the assertion by which the uncoveredness is preserved is related ta these entities.
The assertion is something ready-to-hand. The entities to which it is
related as something that uncovers, are either ready-to-hand or presentat-hand within-the-world. The relation itself presents itself thus, as one
that is present-at-hand. But this relation lies in the fact that the uncoveredness preserved in the assertion is in each case an uncoveredness 0 f something. The judgment 'contains something which holds for the objects'
(Kant). But the relation itself now acquires the character of presence-athand by getting switched over to a relationship between things which are
present-at-hand. The uncoveredness of something becomes the presentat-hand conformity of one thing which is present-at-hand-the assertion
expressed-to something eIse which is present-at-hand-the entity under
discussion. And if this conformity is seen only as a relationship between
things which are present-at-hand-that is, if the kind of Being which
belongs to the terms of this relationship has not been discriminated and is
understood as something merely present-at-hand-then the relation shows
itself as an agreement of two things which are present-at-hand, an agreement which is present-at-hand itself.
When the assertion kas been expressed, the uncoveredness of the entity moves into
the kind of Being ofthat which is ready-to-hand within-the-world. 1 But now to the
extent that in tms uncoveredness, as an uncoveredness 0 f something, a
relationship to something present-at-hand persists, the uncoveredness (truth) becomes,
for ils part, a relationship between things which are present-at-hand intellectus
and res)-a relationship that is present-at-hand itself.
Though it is founded upon Dasein's disclosedness, the existential
phenomenon of uncoveredness becomes a property which is present-athand but in which there still lurks a relational character; and as such a
property, it gets broken asunder into a relationship which is present-athand. Truth as disclosedness and as a Being-towards uncovered entities-a
l'Die Entdecktheit des Seienden rückt mit der AusgesprocJunheit der Aussage in die Seinsart des
innerweltluh Zuhandenen.'

225

268
Being and TiTTll
I. 6
Being which itself uncovers-has become truth as agreement between
things which are present-at-hand within-the-world. And thus we have
pointed out the ontologically derivative character of the traditional conception of truth.
Yet that which is last in the order of the way things are connected in
their foundations existentially and ontologically, is regarded ontically
and factically as that which is first and closest to us. The necessity of this
Fact, however, is based in turn upon the kind of Being which Dasein itself
possesses. Dasein, in its concernful absorption, understands itself in terms
ofwhat it encounters within-the-world. The uncoveredness which belongs
to uncovering, is something that we come across proximally within-theworld in that which has been expressed [im Aurgesprochenen]. Not only
truth, however, is encountered as present-at-hand: in general our understanding of Being is such that every entity is understood in the first
instance as present-at-hand. If the 'truth' which we encounter proximally
in an ontical manner is considered ontologically in the way that is closest
to us, then the À6yos (the assertion) gets understood as À6yos 'Tw6sas an assertion about something, an uncoveredness of something; but
the phenomenon gets Jnterpreted as something present-at-hand with
regard to its possible presence-at-hand. 1 Yet because presence-at-hand
has been equated with the meaning of Being in general, the question of
whether this kind ofBeing oftruth is a primordial one, and whether there
is anything primordial in that structure of it which we encounter as
closest ta us, can not come alive at aIl. The primordial phenomenon of truth has
been covered up by Dasein's very understanding of Being-that understanding which
is proximally the one that prevails, and which even today has not been surmounted
explicitly and in principle.
At the same time, however, we must not overlook the fact that while this
way ofunderstanding Being (the way which is closest to us) is one which the
Greeks were the first to develop as a branch ofknowledge and to master,
the primordial understanding of truth was simultaneously alive among
them, even if pre-ontologically, and it even held its own against the concealment implicit in their ontology-at least in Aristotle. xlll
Aristotle never defends the thesis that the primordial 'locus' of truth
is in the judgment. He says rather that the À6yos is that way of Being in
which Dasein can either uncover or cover up. This double possibility is what
is distinctive in the Being-true of the À6yos: the À6yos is that way of
comporting oneself which can also cover things up. And because Aristotle
never upheld the thesis we have mentioned, he was also never in a
1'. . • interpretiert aber das Phanornen aIs Vorhandenes aufseine rnôgIiche Vorhan-

denheit.'

J. 6
Being and TiTTll
269
situation to 'broaden' the conception of truth in the À6yos to include pure
VOE'V. The truth of at(187)C1ts and of the seeing of 'ideas' is the primordial kind of uncovering. And only because VÔ7)C1ts primarily uncovers,
can the ÀÔyos as 8taVOE'v also have uncovering as its function.
Not only is it wrong to invoke Aristotle for the thesis that the genuine
'locus' of truth lies in the judgment; even in its content this thesis fails
to recognize the structure of truth. Assertion is not the primary 'locus' of
truth. On the contrary, whether as a mode in which uncoveredness is appropriated or as a way ofBeing-in-the-world, assertion is grounded in Dasein's
uncovering, or rather in its disclosedness. The most primordial 'truth' is
the 'locus' of assertion; it is the ontological condition for the possibility
that assertions can be either true or false--that they may uncover or
cover things up.
Truth, understood in the most primordial sense, belongs to the basic
constitution of Dasein. The term signifies an existentiale. But herewith we
have already sketched out our answers to the question of what kind of
Being truth possesses, and to the question of in what sense it is necessary
to presuppose that 'there is truth'.

(c) The Kind of Being which Truth Possesses, and the Presupposition of Truth
Dasein, as constituted by disclosedness, is essentially in the truth.
Disclosedness is a kind of Being which is essential to Dasein. 'There is'
truth only in so far as Dasein i sand so long as Dasein i s. Entities are uncovered only when Dasein is; and only as long as Dasein is, are they
disclosed. Newton's laws, the principleofcontradiction, any truth whatever
-these are true onlyas long as Dasein is. Before there was any Dasein,
there was no truth; nor will there be any after Dasein is no more. For in
such a case truth as disclosedness, uncovering, and uncoveredness, cannot
be. Before Newton's laws were discovered, they were not 'true'; it does
not follow that they were false, or even that they would become fàIse if
ontically no discoveredness were any longer possible. Just as little does
this 'restriction' imply that the Being-true of 'truths' has in any way been
diminished.
To say that before Newton his laws were neither true nor false, cannot
signify that before him there were no such entities as have been uncovered
and pointed out by those laws. Through Newton the laws became true;
and with them, entities became accessible in themselves to Dasein. Once
entities have been uncovered, they show themselves precisely as entities
which beforehand already were. Such uncovering is the kind of Being
which belongs to 'truth'.
That there are 'eternal truths' will not be adequately proved until

227

228

270
Being and Time
I. 6
someone has succeeded in demonstrating that Dasein has been and will
be for aIl eternity. As long as such a proofis still outstanding, this principle
remains a fanciful contention which does not gain in legitimacy from
having philosophers commonly 'believe' it.
Because the kind of Being that is essential to truth is of the character of Dasein,
all truth is relative to Dasein's Being. Does this relativity signify that all truth
is 'subjective'? If one Interprets 'subjective' as 'left to the subject's discretion', then it certainly does not. For uncovering, in the sense which is most
its own, takes asserting out of the province of 'subjective' discretion, and
brings the uncovering Dasein face to face with the entities themselves.
And only because 'truth', as uncovering, is a kind of Being which belongs to
Dasein, can it be taken out of the province of Dasein's discretion. Even the
'universal validity' of truth is rooted solely in the fact that Dasein can
uncover entities in themselves and free them. ünly so can these entities
in themselves be binding for every possible assertion-that is, for
every way of pointing them out. l If truth has been correctIy understood, is it in the least impaired by the fact that it is ontically possible
only in the 'subject' and that it stands and falls with the Being of that
'subject'?
Now that we have an existential conception of the kind of Being that
belongs to truth, the meaning of "presupposing the truth" also becomes
intelligible. Why must wepresuppose that there is truth? What is 'presupposing' ?
What do we have in mind with the 'must' and the 'we'? What does it
mean to say 'there is truth'? 'We' presuppose truth because 'we'. being
in the kind of Being which Dasein possesses, are 'in the truth'. We do not
presuppose it as something 'outside' us and 'above' us, towards which,
along with other 'values', we comport ourselves. It is not we who presuppose 'truth'; but it is 'truth' that makes it at all possible ontologically
for us to be able to be such that we 'presuppose' anything at all. Truth is
what first makes possible anything like presupposing.
What does it mean to 'presuppose'? It is to understand something as
the ground for the Being of some other entity. Such understanding of an
entity in its interconnections of Being, is possible only on the ground of
disc1osedness-that is, on the ground of Dasein's Being something which
uncovers. Thus to presuppose 'truth' means to understand it as something
for the sake of which Dasein i s. But Dasein is already ahead of itself in
each case; this is implied in its state-of-Being as care. It is an entity for
which, in its Being, its ownmost potentiality-for-Being is an issue. To
Dasein's Being and its potentiality-for-Being as Being-in-the-world,

1.6
Being and Time
271
disclosedness and uncovering belong essentially. To Dasein its potentialityfor-Being-in-the-world is an issue, and this inc1udes l concerning itselfwith
entities within-the-world and uncovering them circumspectively. In
Dasein's state-of-Being as care, in Being-ahead-of-itself, lies the most
primordial 'presupposing'. Because this presupposing of itself belongs to Dasein's
Being, 'we' must also presuppose 'ourselves' as having the attribute of disclosedness.
There are also entities with a character oth:er than that of Dasein, but the
'presupposing' which lies in Dasein's Being does not relate itself to these;
it relates itself solely to Dasein itself. The truth which has been presupposed, or the 'there is' by which its Being is to be defined, has that
kind of Being-Qr meaning of Being-which belongs to Dasein itself. We
must 'make' the presupposition of truth because it is one that has been
'made' already with the Being of the 'we'.
We must presuppose truth. Dasein itself, as in each case m y Dasein and
this Dasein, must be; and in the same way the truth, as Dasein's disclosedness, must be. This belongs to Dasein's essential thrownness into the
world. Bas Dasein as itself ever decided freely whether it wants to come into
'Dasein' or not, and will it ever be able to make such a decision? 'In itself' it is
quite incomprehensible why entities are to be uncovered, why truth and
Dasein must be. The usual refutation of that scepticism which denies
either the Being of 'truth' or its cognizability, stops half way. What it
shows, as a formaI argument, is simply that if anything gets judged, truth
has been presupposed. This suggests that 'truth' belongs to assertionthat pointing something out is, by its very meaning, an uncovering. But
when one says this, one kas to clarify why that in which there lies the ontological ground for this necessary connection between assertion and truth
as regards their Being, must be as it is-. The kind of Being which belongs
to truth is likewise left completely obscure, and so is the meaning of
presupposing, and that of its ontological foundation in Dasein itself.
Moreover, one here fails to recognize that even when nobody judges,
truth already gets presupposed in so far as Dasein i s at aIl.
A sceptic can no more be refuted than the Being of truth can be
'proved'. And if any sceptic of the kind who denies the truth, factically is,
he does not even need to be refuted. In so far as he is, and has understood
himself in this Being, he has obliterated Dasein in the desperation of
suicide; and in doing so, he has also obliterated truth. Because Dasein,
for its own part, cannot first be subjected to proof, the necessity of truth
cannot be proved either. It has no more been demonstrated that there
ever has 'been' an 'actual' sceptic 2 (though this is what has at bottom

l'Auch die "Allgemeingültigkeit" der Wahrheit ist lediglich verwurzelt, dass das
Dasein Seiendes an ihm selbst entdecken und freigehen kann. Nur so vermag dieses
Seiende an ihm selbst jede mogliche Aussage, das heisst Aufzeigung seiner, zu hinden.'

1 Reading 'und darin' with the newer editions. The older editions have 'd.h. u.a.'
2 ' ••• dass es je ... einen "wirklichen" Skeptiker "gegehen" hat.' The older editions

have 'nie' ('never') instead of 'je' ('ever').

229

Being and Time
1. 6
been believed in the refutations ofscepticism, in spite ofwhat these undertake to do) than it has been demonstrated that there are any 'eternal
truths'. But perhaps such sceptics have been more frequent than one
would innocently like to have true when one tries to bowl over 'scepticism'
by formaI dialectics.
Thus with the question of the Being of truth and the necessity of presupposing it, just as with the question of the essence of knowledge, an
'ideal subject' has generally been posited. The motive for this, whether
explicit or tacit, lies in the requirement that philosophy should have the
'a priori' as its theme, rather than 'empirical facts' as such. There is sorne
justification for this requirement, though it still needs to be grounded
ontologically. Yet is this requirement satisfied by positing an 'ideal
subject'? Is not such a subject afanciful idealization? With such a conception have we not missed precisely the a priori character of that merely
'factual' subject, Dasein? Is it not an attribute of the a priori character of
the factical subject (that is, an attribute of Dasein's facticity) that it is in
the truth and in untruth equiprimordially?
The ideas of a 'pure "1" , and of a 'consciousness in general' are so far
from including the a priori character of 'actual' subjectivity that the ontological characters of Dasein's facticity and its state of Being are either
passed over or not seen at aIl. Rejection of a 'consciousness in general'
does not signify that the a priori is negated, any more than the positing
of an idealized subject guarantees that Dasein has an a priori character
grounded upon facto
Both the contention that there are 'eternal truths' and the jumbling
together of Dasein's phenomenally grounded 'ideality' with an idealized
absolute subject, belong to those residues of Christian theology within
philosophical problematics which have not as yet been radically
extruded.
The Being of truth is connected primordially with Dasein. And only
because Dasein i s as constituted by disclosedness (that is, by understanding), can anything like Being be understood; only so is it possible
to understand Being.
Being (not entities) is something which 'there is' only in so far as truth
is. And truth is only in so far as and as long as Dasein is. Being and truth
'are' equiprimordially. What does it signify that Being 'is', where Being
is to be distinguished from every entity? One can ask this concretely only
if the meaning of Being and the full scope of the understanding of Being
have in general been clarified. Only then can one also analyse primordially
what belongs to the concept of a science of Being as such, and to its possibilities and its variations. And in demarcating this research and its
272

230

I. 6
Being and Time
273
truth, the kind of research in which entities are uncovered, and its accompanying truth, must be defined ontologically.
The answer to the question of the meaning of Being has yet to be given
[steht ... aus]. What has our fundamental analysis of Dasein, as we have
carried it out so far, contributed to working out this question? By laying
bare the phenomenon of care, we have clarified the state of Being of that
entity to whose Being something like an understanding of Being belongs.
At the same time the Being of Dasein has thus been distinguished from
modes of Being (readiness-to-hand, presence-at-hand, Reality) which
characterize entities with a character other than that of Dasein. Understanding has itself been elucidated; and at the same time the method-'
ological transparency of the procedure of Interpreting Being by understanding it and interpreting it, has thus been guaranteed.
If in care we have arrived at Dasein's primordial state of Being, then
this must also be the basis for conceptualizing that understanding of
Being which lies in care; that is to say, it must be possible to define the
meaning of Being. But is the phenomenon of care one in which the most
primordial existential-ontological state of Dasein is disclosed? And has
the structural manifoldness which lies in this phenomenon, presented us
with the most primordial totality of factical Dasein's Being? Ras our
investigation up to this point ever brought Dasein into view as a whole ?

Being and Time
275
primordiality, or the lack of it? What, indeed, do we mean by the
"primordialiry" of an ontological Interpretation?
Ontological investigation is a possible kind of interpreting, which we
have described as the working-out and appropriation of an understanding. 111 Every interpretation has its fore-having, its fore-sight, and its
fore-conception. If such an interpretation, as Interpretation, becomes an
explicit task for research, then the totality of these 'presuppositions'
(which we calI the "hermeneutical Situation") needs to be clarified and made
secure beforehand, both in a basic experience of the 'object' to be disclosed, and in terms of such an experience. In ontological Interpretation
an entity is to be laid bare with regard to its own state of Being; such an
Interpretation obliges us first to give a phenomenal characterization of
the entity we have taken as our theme, and thus to bring it into the scope
of our fore-having, with which aIl the subsequent steps of our analysis are
to conform. But at the same time these step~ need to be guided by whatever fore-sight is possible as to the kind of Being which the entity may
possess. Our fore-having and our fore-sight will then give us at the same
time a sketch of that way of conceiving (or fore-conception) to the level
of which aIl structures of Being are to be raised.
If, however, the ontological Interpretation is to be a primordial one,
this not only demands that in general the henneneutical Situation shaIl
be one which has been made secure in conformity with the phenomena;
it also requires explicit assurance that the whole of the entity which it has
taken as its theme has been brought into the fore-having. Similarly, it
is not enoughjust to make a first sketch of the Being ofthisentity, even if
our sketch is grounded in the phenomena. If we are to have a fore-sight
ofBeing, we must see it in such a way as not to miss the uniry ofthose str~c­
tural items which belong to it and are possible. Only then can the questIOn
of the meaning of the unitY which belongs to the whole entity's totality
of Being, be formulated and answered with any phenomenal assuranc.e.
Ras the existential analysis of Dasein which we have carried out, amen
from such a hermeneutical Situation as will guarantee the primordiality
which fundamental ontology demands? Can we progress from the result
we have obtained-that the being of Dasein is care-to the question of the
primordial unity of this structural whole? .
.
What is the status of the fore-sight by WhlCh our ontologlcal procedure
has hitherto been guided? We have defined the idea of existence, as
a potentiality-for-Being-a potentiality which understands, and f~r w~l~h
its own Being is an issue. But this potentialiry-Jor-Bein~, as one ~~lch IS m
each case mine is free either for authenticity or for mauthentlclty or for
a mode in whi~h neither ofthese has been differentiated,lv ln starting with
II

DIVISION TWO
DASEIN AND TEMPORALITYl

The Outcome of the Preparatory Fundamental Ana!Jsis of Dasein, and the
T ask of a Primordial Existential Interpretation of this Entiry
W HA T have we gained by our preparatory analysis of Dasein, and what
are we seeking? ln Being-in-the-world, whose essential structures centre
in disclosedness, we havefound the basic state of the entitywe have taken as
our theme. The totality of Being-in-the-world as a structural whole has
revealed itself as care. In care the Being of Dasein is included. When we
came to analyse this Being, we took as our clue existence!, which, in anticipation, we had designated as the essence of Dasein. This tenn "existence" formaIly indicates that Dasein is as an understanding potentialityfor-Being, which, in its Being, makes an issue of that Being itself. In every
case, 1 myself am the entity which is in such a manner [dergestalt s?ie~d].
Byworkingout the phenomenonofcare, wehave given ourselves an Inslght
into the concrete constitution of existence-that is, an insight into its
equiprimordial connection with Dasein's facticity and its falling.
What we are seeking is the answer to the question about the meaning of
Being in general, and, prior to that, the possibility of working out in a
radical manner this basic question of aIl ontology. But to lay bare the
horizon within which something like Being in general becomes intelligible,
is tantamount to clarifying the possibility of having any understanding of
Being at aIl-an understanding which itself belongs to the constitution of
the entity caIled Dasein. ll The understanding of Being, however, cannot
be radical!J clarified as an essential element in Dasein's Being, unless the
entity to whose Being it belongs, has been Interpreted primordial!J in
itself with regard to its Being.
Are we entitled to the claim that in characterizing Dasein ontologicaIly
qua care we have given a primordial Interpretation of this entity? By what
criterion is the existential analytic of Dasein to be assessed as regards its
~ 45.

l 'Dasein und Zeitlichkeit', In this heading and in others which follow in this Division,
we have capitalized such words as :temporal' and 'constit~tion'in a~cordancewithnor~al
practice in titles, even when this vlOlates the orthographlc conventIOns of our translatIOn.

232

276
Being and Time
II
average everydayness, our Interpretation has heretofore been confined to
the analysis of such existing as is either undifferentiated or inauthentic.
Of course even along this path, it was possible and indeed necessary to
233 reach a concrete determination of the existentiality of existence. Nevertheless, our ontological characterization of the constitution of existence
stilliacked something essential. "Existence" means a potentiality-for-Being
-but also one which is authentic. As long as the existential structure
of an authentic potentiality-for-~eing has not been brought into the
idea of existence, the fore-sight by which an existential Interpretation is
guided williack primordiality.
And how about what we have had in advance in our hermeneutical
Situation hitherto? How about its fore-having? When and how has our
existential analysis received any assurance that by starting with everydayness, it has forced the whole of Dasein-this entity from its 'beginning' to
its 'end'-into the phenomenological view which gives us our theme?
We have indeed contended that care is the totality of the structural whole
of Dasein's constitution.v But have we not at the very outset of our Interpretation renounced the possibility ofbringing Dasein into view as a whole ?
Everydayness is precisely that Being which is 'between' birth and death.
And if existence is definitive for Dasein's Being and if its essence is constituted in part by potentiality-for-Being, then, as long as Dasein exists,
it must in each case, as such a potentiality, notyet be something. Anyentity
whose Essence is made up of existence, is essentially opposed to the
possibility of our getting it in our grasp as an entity which is a
whole. Not only has the hermeneutical Situation hitherto given us no
assurance of 'having' the whole entity: one may even question whether
"having" the whole entity is attainable at aIl, and whether a primordial
ontological Interpretation of Dasein will not founder on the kind of Being
which belongs to the very entity we' have taken as our theme.
One thing has become unmistakable: our existential ana{ysis of Dasein up
tilt now cannot lay claim to primordiality. Its fore-having never included more
than the inauthentic Being of Dasein, and of Dasein as less than a whole
[als unganzes]. If the Interpretation of Dasein's Being is to become primordial, as a foundation for working out the basic question of ontology,
then it must first have brought to light existentially the Being of Dasein
in its possibilities of authenticity and totality.
Thus arises the task of putting Dasein as a whole into our fore-having.
This signifies, however, that we must first of aIl raise the question of this
entity's potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. As long as Dasein is, there is in
every case something still outstanding, which Dasein can be and will be.
234 But to that which is thus outstanding, the 'end' itself belongs. The 'end'

II

Being and Time
277
of Being-in-the-world is death. This end, which belongs to the potentiality-for-Being-that is to say, to existence-limits and determines iD
every case whatever totality is possible for Dasein. If, however, Dasein's
Being-at-an-end 1 in death, and therewith its Being-a-whole, are to be
included in the discussion of its possibly Being-a-whole, and if this is to be
done in a waywhich is appropriate to the phenomena, then we must have
obtained an ontologically adequate conception of death-that is ta say
an existeT}tial conception of it. But as something of the character of Dasein,
death is only in an existentiell Being towards death [Sein zum Tode]. The
existential structure of such Being proves to be the ontologically constitutive state of Dasein's potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. Thus the whole
existing Dasein allows itself to be brought into our existential fore-having.
But can Dasein also exist authentical{y as a whole? How is the authenticity
of existence to be determined at aIl, if not with regard to authentic
existing? Where do we get our criterion for this? Manifestly, Dasein
itself must, in its Being, present us with the possibility and the manner of
its authentic existence, unless such existence is something that can be
imposed upon it onticaIly, or ontologically fabricated. But an authentic
potentiality-for-Being is attested by the conscience. And conscience, as a
phenomenon of Dasein, demands, like death, a genuinely existential
Interpretation. Such an Interpretation leads to the insight that Dasein has
an authentic potentiality-for-Being in that it wants to have a conscience. But
this is an existentiell possibility which tends, from the very meaning of its
Being, to be made definite in an existentiell way by Being-towards-death.
By pointing out that Dasein has an authentic potentiality-Jor-Being-a-whole,
the existential analytic acquires assurance as to the constitution ofDasein's
primordial Being. But at the same time the authentic potentiality-for-Beinga-whole becomes visible as a mode of care. And therewith the phenomenally adequate ground for a primordial Interpretation of the meaning
of Dasein's Being has also been assured.
But the primordial ontological basis for Dasein's existentiality is temporality. In terms of temporality, the articulated structural totality of
Dasein's Being as care first becomes existentially intelligible. The Interpretation of the meaning of Dasein's Being cannot stop with this demonstration. The existential-temporal analysis of this entity needs to be
confirmed concretely. We must go back and lay bare in their temporal
meaning the ontological structures of Dasein which we have previously
obtained. Everydayness reveals itself as a mode of temporality. But by
thus recapitulating our preparatory fundamental analysis of Dasein, we
l 'Zu-Ende-sein', This expression is to be distinguished from 'Sein-zum-Ende', which
we shaH translate as 'Being-towards-the-end',

235

278
Being and Time
II
will at the same time make the phenomenon of temporality itself more
transparent. In terms of temporality, it then becomes intelligible why
Dasein is, and can be, historical in the basis of its Being, and why, as
historieal, it can develop historiology.
If temporality makes up the primordial meaning of Dasein's Being,
and if moreover this entity is one for which, in its Being, this very Being is
an issue, then care must use 'time' and therefore must reckon with 'time'.
'Time-reckoning' is developed by Dasein's temporality. The 'time' which
is experienced in such reckoning is that phenomenal aspect of temporality
which is closest to us. Out ofit arises the ordinary everyday understanding
of time. And this understanding evolves into the traditional conception
oftime.
By casting light on the source of the 'time' 'in which' entities withinthe-world are encountered-time as "within-time-ness"-we shall make
manifest an essential possibility of the temporalizing of temporaÏity.l
Therewith the understanding prepares itself for an even more primordial
temporalizing of temporality. In this 2 is grounded that understanding of
Being which is constitutive for the Being of Dasein. Within the horizon
of time the projection of a meaning of Being in general can be accomplished.
Thus the investigation comprised in the division which lies befÔ{e us
will now traverse the following stages: Dasein's possibility of Being-awhole, and Being-towards-death (Chapter 1); Dasein's attestation of an
authentic potentiality-for-Being, and resoluteness (Chapter 2); Dasein's
authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole, and temporality as the ontological meaning of care (Chapter 3); temporality and everydayness
(Chapter 4); temporality and historicality (Chapter 5); temporality
and within-time-ness as the source of the ordinary conception of time
(Chapter 6).Vl
l'Die Aufhellung des Ursprungs der "Zeit", "in der" innerweltliches Seiendes begegnet, der Zeit ais Innerzeitigkeit, offenbart eine wesenhafte Zeitigungsmoglichkeit der
Zeitlichkeit.' On 'zeitigen' see H. 304 below.
Il 'In ihr •• .' It is not clear whether the pronoun 'ihr' refers to 'Zeitigung' ('temporalizing') or 'Zeitlichkeit' ('temporality').

1
DASEIN'S POSSIBILITY OF BEING-A-WHOLE, AND
BEING-TOWARDS-DEATH
~ 46. The Seeming Impossibility of Getting Dasein's Being-a-whole into our Grasp
Ontologically and Determining its Character
THE inadequacy of the hermeneutical Situation from which the preceding
analysis of Dasein has arisen, must be surmounted. It is necessary for us
to bring the whole Dasein into our fore-having. We must accordingly ask
whether this entity, as something existing, can ever become accessible in
its Being-a-whole. In Dasein's very state of Being, there are important
reasons which seem to speak against the possibility of having it presented
[Vorgabe] in the manner required.
The possibility of this entity's Being-a-whole is manifestly inconsistent
with the ontological meaning of care, and care is that which forms the
totality of Dasein's structural whole. Yet the primary item in care is
the 'ahead-of-itself', and this means that in every case Dasein exists for the
sake ofitself. 'As long as it is', right to its end, it comports itselftowards its
potentiality-for-Being. Even when it still exists but has nothing more
'before it' and has 'settled [abgeschlossen] its account', its Being is still
determined by the 'ahead-of-itself'. Hopelessness, for instance, does not
tear Dasein away from its possibilities, but is only one of its own modes of
Being towards these possibilities. Even when one is without Illusions and
'is ready for anything' ["Gefasstsein auf Alles"], here too the 'ahead-ofitself' lies hidden. The 'ahead-of-itself', as an item in the structure of care,
tells us unambiguously that in Dasein there is always something still
outstanding,l which, as a potentiality-for-Being for Dasein itself, has not
yet become 'actual'. It is essential to the basic constitution of Dasein that
there is constantly something still to be settled [eine stiindige Unabgeschlossenheit].
Such a lack of totality signifies that there is something still outstanding in
one's potentiality-for-Being.

l ' ... im Dasein immer noch etwas aussteht .• .' The verb 'ausstehen' and the noun
'Ausstand' (which we usually translate as 'something sti~l ou~tanding', etc.), .are or~in­
arily used in German to apply to a debt or a bank deposlt WhlCh, from the pomt ofvlew
of the lender or depositor, has yet to be repaid to him, liquidated, or withdrawn.

236

280

237

Being and Time

II. 1

But.as ~oon as Das:in :e~sts' in s~ch a way that absolutely nothing
more IS stIll outstandmg mit, then It has already for this very reason
bec~~e "no-longer-Being-there" [Nieht-mehr-da-sein]. Its Being is
anmhI1ated when what is still outstanding in its Being has been liquidated.
As long as Dasein is as an entity, it has never reached its 'wholeness'.1
~ut if it gains such 'wholeness', this gain becomes the utter loss of Beingm-the-world. In such a case, it can never again be experienced as an entiry.
The reason for the impossibility of experiencing Dasein ontically as a
whole whieh is [aIs seiendes Ganzes], and therefore of determining its
c~aracter ontol~~cally in its Being-a-whole, does not lie in any imperfectIon of our cogmtwe powers. The hindrance lies rather in the Being of this
entity. Tha~ ,":hi~ cannot ever be such as any experience whieh pretends
to get ~asem m.lts grasp would c1aim, eludes in principle any possibility
of getting expenenced at all. 2 But in that case is it not a hopeless undertaking to try to discem in Dasein its ontological totality of Being?
We cannot cross out the 'ahead-of-itself' as an essential item in the
structure ofcare. But how sound are the conc1usionswhich we have drawn
from this? Has not the impossibility of getting the whole of Dasein into
our grasp been inferred by an argument which is merely formaI? Or have
we not at bottom inadvertently posited that Dasein is something presentat-hand, ahead of whieh something that is not yet present-at-hand is
constantly shoving itself? Have we, in our argument, taken "Being-notyet" and the 'ahead' in a sense that is genuinely existential? Has our talk
of the 'end' and 'totality' been phenomenaIly appropriate to Dasein?
Has the expression 'death' had a biological signification or one that is
existential-ontological, or indeed any signification that has been adequately and surely delimited? Have we indeed exhausted all the possibilities for making Dasein accessible in its wholeness?
We m~st ~nswer these questions before the problem ofDasein's totality
can be dlsmlssed as nugatory [nichtiges]. This question-bath the existentiell question of whether a potentiality-for-Being-a-whole is possible
~nd th: exis~ential question of the state-of-Being of 'end' and 'totality'---':
IS one m WhlCh there lurks the task of giving a positive analysis for some
phenomena of existence which up till now have been left aside. In the
centre of ~hese c~nsiderationswe have the task ofcharacterizing ontologically Dasem's Bemg-at-an-end and of achieving an existential conception
l 'pie Beh~bung ?es Seinsausstandes besagt Vernichtung seines Seins. Solange das
pasem ais Selendes. &st, hat, es seine "Gii~ze" nie erreicht.' The verb 'beheben' is used
m the sense of cl?sl~g o~e s ~ccount or hquidating it by withdrawing money from the
.h d
bank. The noun Ganze, WhlCh we shaH translate as 'wholeness' is to he dist'
fro~ 'Ganze' ('w~ole', or o~casiona1l>: 't?tality') and 'Ganzheit' ('totality'). mgulS e
.Was ~o gar mch.t e~t s~ kann, Will em Erfahren das Dasein zu erfassen priitendiert
'
entzleht slch KI'Undsiitzhch emer Erfahrbarkeit.'

II. 1

Being and Time

281

of death. The investigations relating to these topies are divided up
as follows: the possibility of experiencing the death of Others, and the
possibility of getting a whole Dasein into our grasp (Section 47); that
which is still outstanding, the end, and totality (Section 48); how the
existential analysis of death is distinguished from other possible Interpretations of this phenomenon (Section 49); a preliminary sketch of the
existential-ontological structure of death (Section 50); Being-towardsdeath and the everydayness of Dasein (Section 51); everyday Beingtowards-death, and the full existential conception of death (Section 52) ;
an existential projection ofan authentic Being-towards-death (Section 53).

1f 47· The Possibiliry of Experiencing the Death of Others, and the Possibiliry of
Getting a Whole Dasein into our Grasp
When Dasein reaches its wholeness in death, it simultaneously loses the
Being of its "there". By its transition to no-Ionger-Dasein [Nichtmehrdasein], it gets lifted right out of the possibility of experiencing this
transition and ùf understanding it as something experienced. Surely this
sort of thing is denied to any particular Dasein in relation to itself. But
this makes the death ofOthers more impressive. In this way a termination
[Beendigung] of Dasein becomes 'Objectively' accessible. Dasein can
thus gain an experience of death, aIl the more so because Dasein is essentiaIly Being with Others. In that case, the fact that death has been thus
'Objectively' given must make possible an ontological delimitation of
Dasein's totality.
Thus from the kind of Being which Dasein possesses as Being with one 23 8
another, we mightdrawthefairlyobviousinformation thatwhen the Dasein
ofOthers has come to an end, it might be chosen as a substitute theme for
our analysis of Dasein's totality. But does this lead us to our appointed
goal?
Even the Dasein of Others, when it has reached its wholeness in death,
is no-longer-Dasein, in the sense of Being-no-Ionger-in-the-world. Does
not dying mean going-out-of-the-world, and losing one's Being-in-theworld? Yet when someone has died, his Being-no-Ionger-in-the-world (if
we understand it in an extreme way) is still a Being, but in the sense of the
Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more of a corporeal Thing which we
encounter. In the dying of the Other we can experience that remarkable
phenomenon of Being which may be defined as the change-over of an
entity from Dasein's kind of Being (or life) to no-Ionger-Dasein. The end
of the entity qua Dasein is the beginning of the same entity qua something
present-at-hand•
However, in this way of Interpreting the change-over from Dasein to

239

282
Being and Time
II. 1
Being-just-present-at-hand-and-no-more, the phenomenal content is
missed, inasmuch as in the entity which still remains we are not presented
with a mere corporeal Thing. From a theoretical point ofview, even the
corpse which is present-at-hand is still a possible object for the student of
pathological anatomy, whose understanding tends to be oriented to the
idea of life. This something which is just-present-at-hand-and-no-more is
'more' than a lifeless material Thing. In it we encounter something
unalive, which has lost its life. l
But even this way of characterizing that which still remains [des Nochverbleibenden] does not exhaust the full phenomenal findings with regard
to Dasein.
The 'deceased' [Der "Verstorbene"] as distinct from the dead person
[dem Gestorbenen], has been torn away from those who have 'remained
behind' [den "Hinterbliebenen"], and is an object of 'concern' in the
ways of funeral rites, interment, and the cult of graves. And that is so
because the deceased, in his kind ofBeing, is 'still more' thanjust an item
of equipment, environmentally ready-to-hand, about which one can be
concerned. In tarrying alongside him in their mourning and commemoration, those who have remained behind are with,him, in a mode ofrespectful
solicitude. Thus the relationship-of-Being which one has towards the dead
is not to be taken as a concernful Being-alongside something ready-to-hand.
In such Being-with the dead [dem Toten], the deceased himself is no
longer factically 'there'. However, when we speak of "Being-with", we
always have in view Being with one another in the same world. The
deceased has abandoned our 'world' and left it behind. But in terms of
that world [Aus ihr her] those who remain can still he with him.
The greater the phenomenal appropriateness with which we take the
no-Ionger-Dasein of the deceased, the more plainly is it shown that in
such Being-with the dead, the authentic Being-come-to-an-end [Zuendegekommensein] of the deceased is precisely the sort of thing which we
do not experience. Death does indeed reveal itself as a loss, but a loss such
as is experienced by those who remain. In suffering this loss, however,
we have no way o( access to the loss-of-Being as such which the dying
man 'suffers'. The dying of Others is not something which we experience
in a genuine sense; at most we are always just 'there alongside'. 2
And even if, by thus Being there alongside, it were possible and feasible

II. 1
Being and Time
283
for us to make plain to ourselves 'psychologically' the dying of Others,
this wouldby no means let us grasp the way-to-be which we would then
have in mind-namely, coming-to-an-end. We are asking about the
ontological meaning of the dying of the person who dies, as a possibilityof-Being which belongs to his Being. We are not asking about the way in
which the deceased has Dasein-with or is still-a-Dasein [Nochdaseins]
with those who are left behind. If death as experienced in Others is what
we are enjoined to take as the theme for our analysis of Dasein's end and
totality, this cannot give us, either ontically or ontologically,' what it
presumes to give.
But above aIl, the suggestion that the dying of Others is a substitute
theme for the ontological analysis of Dasein's totality and the settling of
its account, rests on a presupposition which demonstrably fails altogether l
to reeognize Dasein's kind of Being. This is what one presupposes when
one is of the opinion that any Dasein may be substituted for another at
random, so that what cannot be experieneed in one's own Dasein is
accessible in that of a stranger. But is this presupposition actually so
baseless?
Indisputably, the fact that one Dasein can he represented2 by another
belongs to its possibilities of Being in Being-with-one-another in the world.
In everyday concern, constant and manif<;>ld use is made of such representability. Whenever we go anywhere or have anything to contribute, we can
be represented by someone within the range of that 'environment' with
which we are most closely concerned. The great multiplicity of ways of
Being-in-the-world in which one person can be represented by another,
not only extends to the more refined modes of publicly being with one
an,other, but is likewise germane to those possibilities of concern which
are restricted within definite ranges, and which are eut to the measure of
one's occupation, one's social status, or one's age. But the very meaning
of such representation is such that it is always a representation 'in' ["in"
und "bei"] something-that is to say, in concerning oneselfwith something.
But proxiInally and for the most part everyday Dasein understands itself
in terms of that with which it is eustomarily coneerned. 'One is' what one
does. In relation ta this sort of Being (the everyday manner in which we
join with one another in absorption in the 'world' of our eoncern)
representability is not only quite possible but is even constitutive for our

l 'Das ~ur-noch-Vorhanden~ist "mehr" aIs ein lebloses materielles Ding. Mit ihm
begegnet em des Lebens verlustIg gegangenes Unlebendiges.'
2 ",' " sind ... "dabei:'.' Litera~ly the verb 'dabeisein' rneans sirnply 'to be at that
place, to ~e there along~lde'; but It also has other connotations which ~ive an ironical
~ouch ~o thlS pa~sa?e, for It rnay also rnean, 'to be engaged in' sorne activlty, 'to be at it',
to be m the SWlrn, 'to be ready to be "counted in" '.

l '. . . eine vallige Verkennung •• .' The oIder editions have 'totale' rather than
'vallige'.
2 'Vertretbarkeit'. The verb 'vertreten' means 'to represent' in the sense of 'deputizing'
for someone. It should be noted that the verb 'vorstellen' is also sometirnes translated as
'to represent', but in the quite different sense of 'affording a "representation" or "idea"
of something'.

284

Being and Time
II. 1
240 being with one another. Bere one Dasein can and must, within certain
limits, 'he' another Dasein.
However, this possibility of representing breaks down completely if the
issue is one of representing that possibility-of-Being which makes up
Dasein's coming to an end, and which, as such, gives to it its wholeness.
No one can take the Other's dying away from him. Ofcourse someone can 'go to
his death for another'. But that always means to sacrifice oneselffor the
Other 'in some definite alfair'. Such "dying for" can never signify that the
Other has thus had his death taken away in even the slightest degree.
Dying is something that every Dasein itself must take upon itself at the
time. By its very essence, death is in every case mine, in so far as it ois' at
aIl. And indeed death signifies a peculiar possibility-of-Being in which
the very Being of one's own Dasein is an issue. In dying, it is shown that
mineness and existence are ontologicaIly constitutive for death.1 Dying is
not an event; it is a phenomenon to be understood existentially; and it is
to be understood in a distinctive sense which must be still more c10sely
delimited.
But if 'ending', as dying, is constitutive for Dasein's totality, then the
Being of this wholeness itself must be conceived as an existential phenomenon of a Dasein which is in each case one's own. In 'ending', and in
Dasein's Being-a-whole, for which such ending is constitutive, there is,
by its very essence, no representing. These are the facts of the case existentiaIly; one fails to recognize this when one interposes the expedient of
making the dying of Others a substitute theme for the analysis of totality.
So once again the attempt to make Dasein's Being-a-whole accessible
in a way that is appropriate to the phenomena, has broken down. But our
deliberations have not been negative in their outcome; they have been
oriented by the phenomena, even if only rather roughly. We have
indicated that death is an existential phenomenon. Our investigation is
thus forced into a purely existential orientation to the Dasein which is in
every case one's own. The only remaining possibility for the analysis of
death as dying, is either to form a purely existential conception of this
phenomenon, or else to forgo any ontological understanding of it.
When we characterized the transition from Dasein' to no-longerDasein as Being-no-Ionger-in-the-world, we showed further that Dasein's
going-out-of-the-world in the sense of dying must be distinguished t'rom
the going-out-of-the-world of that which merely has life [des Nur-lebenden]. In our terminology the ending of anything that is alive, is denoted
24 1 as "perisl:Iing" [Verenden]. We can see the difference only if the kind
of ending which Dasein can have is distinguished from the end of a life.u
Of course "dying" may also be taken physiologicaIly and biologicaIly.

II. 1
Being and Time
285
But the medical concept of the 'exitus' does not coincide with that of
"perishing".
From the foregoing discussion of the ontological possibility of getting
death into our grasp, it becomes clear at the same time that substructures
of entities with another kind of Being (presence-at-hand or life) thrust
themselves to the fore unnoticed, and threaten to bring confusion to the
Interpretation of this phenomenon-even to the first suitable way of
presenting it. We can encounter this phenomenon only by seeking, for our
further analysis, an ontologicaIly adequate way ofdefining the phenomena
which are constitutive for it, such as "end" and "totality".
~ 48. That which is Still Outstanding; the End; Totality

Within the framework of this investigation, our ontological characterization of the end and totality can be only provisional. To perform this
task adequately, we must not only set forth theformal structure of end in
general and of totality in general; we must Iikewise disentangle the structural variations which are possible for them in different realms-that is to
say, deformalized variations which have been put into relationship respectively with definite kinds of entities as 'subject-matter', and which have
had their character Determined in terms of the Being of these entities.
This task, in turn, presupposes that a sufficiendy unequivocal and positive
Interpretation shall have been given for the kinds of Being which require
that the aggregate of entities be divided into such realms. But if we are
to understand these ways of Being, we need a c1arified idea of Being in
general. The task of carrying out in an appropriate way the ontological
analysis of end and totality breaks down not only because the theme is so
fàr-reaching, but because there is a difficulty in principle: to master this
task successfuIly, we must presuppose that precisely what we are seeking
in this investigation-the meaning of Being in general-is something
which we have found already and with which we are quite familiar.
In the foIlowing considerations, the 'variations' in which we are chiefly
interested are those of end and totality; these are ways in which Dasein
gets a definite character ontologicaIly, and as such they should lead to a
primordial Interpretation of this entity. Keeping constantly in view the
existential constitution of Dasein already set forth, we must try to decide
how inappropriate to Dasein ontologically are those conceptions of end
and totality which first thrust themselves to the fore, no matter how
categoriaIly indefinite they may remain. The rejection [Zurückweisung]
of such concepts must be developed into a positive assignment [Zuweisung]
of them to their specific realms. In this way our understanding of end and
totality in their variant forms as existentialia will be strengthened, and this

242

286
Being and Time
II. 1
will guarantee the possibility of an ontological Interpretation of death.
But even if the analysis of Dasein's end and totality takes on so broad
an orientation, this cannot mean that the existential concepts of end and
tC1tality are to be obtained by way of a deduction. On the contrary, the
existential meaning of Dasein's coming-to-an-end must be taken from
Dasein itself, and we must show how such 'ending' can constitute Beinga-whole for the entity which exists.
We may formulate in three theses the discussion of death up to this
point: I. there belongs to Dasein, as long as it is, a "not-yet" which it
will bc-that which is constantly still outstandingj 2. the cOIning-to-its-end
of what-is-not-yet-at-an-end (in which what is still outstanding is liquidated as regards its Being) has the character ofno-Ionger-Daseinj 3. comingto-an-end implies a mode of Being in which the particular Dasein simply
cannot be represented by someone else.
In Dasein there is undeniably a constant 'lack of totality' which finds
an end with death. This "not-yet" 'belongs' to Dasein as long as it is;
this is how things stand phenomenaHy. Is this to be Interpreted as still
outstanding?l With relation to what entities do we talk about that which
is still outstanding? When we use this expression we have in view that
which indeed 'belongs' to an entity, but is still missing. Outstanding, as a
way of being missing, is grounded upon a belonging-to. 2 For instance, the
remainder yet to be received when a debt is to be balanced off, is still
outstanding. That which is still outstanding is not yet at one's disposaI.
When the 'debt' gets paid off, that which is still outstanding gets liquidatedj this signifies that the money 'cornes in', or, in other words, that the
remainder cornes successively along. By this procedure the "not-yet" gets
fiHed up, as it were, until the sum that is owed is "aH together". 3 Therefore, to be still outstanding means that what belongs together is not yet
aH together. OntologicaHy, this implies the un-readiness-to-hand ofthose
portions which have yet to be contributed. These portions have the same
kind of Being as those which are ready-to-hand already; and the latter,
for their part, do not have their kind of Being modified by having the
remainder come in. Whatever "lack-of-togetherness" remains [Das bestehende Unzusammen] gets "paid off' by a cumulative piecing-together.
Entities for which anything is still outstanding have the kind of Being of something
l'Aber darf der phanomenale Tatbestand, dass zum Dasein, solange es ist dieses
Noch-nicht "gehort", ais Ausstand interpretiert werden?' The contrast between 'Tatbestand' and 'Ausstand' is perhaps intentional.
Il Ausstehen ais Fehlen gründet in einer Zugehorigkeit.'
• 8 'Tilgu?g der "Schuld" ais Behebung des Ausstandes bedeutet das "Eingehen", das
IS~ Nac~em~nderankommen des Restes, wodurch das Noch-nicht gleichsam aufgefüllt
wlrd, bIS die geschuldete Summe "beisammen" ist.' On 'Schuld' see note l, p. 325,
H.280.

II. 1

Being and Time
287
ready-to-hand. The togetherness [Das Zusammen] is characterized as a
"sum", and so is that lack-of-togetherness which is founded upon it.
But this lack-of-togetherness which belongs to such a mode of together- 243
ness-this being-missing as still-outstanding-cannot by any means define
ontologicaHy that "not-yet" which belongs to Dasein as its possible death.
Dasein does not have at aH the kind of Being ofsomething ready-to-hand~
within-the-world. The togetherness of an entity of the kind which Dasein
is 'in running its course' until that 'course' has been completed, is not
constituted by a 'continuing' piecing-on of entities which, somehow and
somewhere, are ready-to-hand already in their own right. 1
That Dasein should be together only when its "not-yet" has been filled
up is so far from the case that it is precisely then that Dasein is no longer.
Any Dasein always exists in just such a manner that its "not-yet" belongs
to it. But are there not entities which are as they are and to which a
"not-yet" can belong, but which do not necessarily have Dasein's kind
of Being?
For instance, we can say, "The last quarter is still outstanding until
the moon gets full". The "not-yet" diminishes as the concealing shadow
disappears. But here the moon is always present-at-hand as a whole
already. Leaving aside the fact that we can never get the moon wholly in
our grasp even when it is full, this "not-yet" does not in any way signify
a not-yet-Being-together of the parts which belongs to the moon, but
pertains only to the way we get it in our grasp perceptually. The "not-yet"
which belongs to Dasein, however, is not just something which is provisionally and occasionally inaccessible to one's own experience or even
to that of a strangerj it 'is' not yet 'actual' at aIl. Our problem does not
pertain to getting into our grasp the "not-yel' which is of the character of
Dasein j it pertains to the possible Being or not-Being of this "not-yet".
Dasein must, as itself, become-that is to say, be-what it is not yet. Thus
if we are to be able, by comparison, to define that Being of the "not-yet"
which is of the character of Dasein, we must take into consideration entities
to whose kind of Being becoming belongs.
When, for instance, a fruit is unripe, it "goes towards" its ripeness.
In this process of ripening, that which the fruit is not yet, is by no means
pieced on as something not yet present-at-hand. The fruit brings itself to
ripeness, and such a bringing of itself is a characteristic of its Being as a
fruit. Nothing imaginable which one might contribute to it, would eliminate the unripeness of the fruit, if this entity did not come to ripeness of its
1 Throughout this sentence Heidegger uses words derived from the verb 'Iaufen', 'to
run'. Thus, 'in running its course' represents 'in seinem Verlauf', '''its course" has been
completed' represents 'es "seinem Lauf" vollendet hat'; 'continuing' represents 'fortlaufende'.

288
Being and Time
II. 1
own accord. When we speak of the "not-yet" of the unripeness, we do not
have in view something else which stands outside [aussenstehendes], and
which-with utter indifference to the fruit-might be present-at-hand in
it and with it. What we have in view is the fruit itself in its specific kind
of Being. The sum which is not yet complete is, as something ready-tohand, 'a matter of indifference' as regards the remainder which is lacking
and un-ready-to-hand, though, taken stricdy, it can neither be indifferent
to that remainder nor not be indifferent to it. l The ripening fruit, how244 ever, not only is not indifferent to its unripeness as something other than
itself, but it is that unripeness as it ripens. The "not-yet" has already been
inc1uded in the very Being of the fruit, not as sorne random characteristic,
but as something constitutive. Correspondingly, as long as any Dasein is,
it too is already its "not-yet".111
That which makes up the 'lack of totality' in Dasein, the constant
"ahead-of-itself", is neither something still outstanding in a summative
togetherness, nor something which has not yet become accessible. It is a
"not-yet" which any Dasein, as the entity which it is, has to be. Nevertheless, the comparison with the unripeness of the fruit shows essential
differences, although there is a certain agreement. If we take note of these
differences, we shall recognize how indefinite our talk about the end and
ending has hitherto been.
Ripening is the specific Being of the fruit. It is also a kind ofBeing of the
"not-yet" (of unripeness); and, as such a kind of Being, it is formally
analogous to Dasein, in that the latter, like the former, is in every case
already its "not-yet" in a sense still to be defined. But even then, this does
not signify that ripeness as an 'end' and death as an 'end' coincide with
regard to their ontological structure as ends. With ripeness, the fruit
fulfils itself. 2 But is the death at which Dasein arrives, a fulfilment in this
sense? With its death, Dasein has indeed 'fulfilled its course'. But in doing
so, has it necessarily exhausted its specific possibilities? Rather, are not
these precisely what gets taken away from Dasein? Even 'unfulfilled'
Dasein ends. On the other hand, so litde is it the case that Dasein cornes
to its ripeness only with death, that Dasein may well have passed its
ripeness before the end. 3 For the most part, Dasein ends in unfulfilment,
or else by having disintegrated and been used up.
l'Die noch nicht voUe Summe ist ais Zuhandenes gegen den fehlenden unzuhand'enen
Rest "gleichgültig". Streng genommen kann sie weder ungleichgültig, noch gleichgüItig
dagegen sein.'
2 'Mit der Reife vollendet sich die Frucht.' Notice that the verb 'voUenden', which we
here translate as 'fulfil', involves the verb 'enden' ('to end'). While 'voUenden' may mean
'to bring fully to an end' or 'to terminate', it may also mean 'to complete' or 'to perfect'o
3 While we have translated 'Reife' by its cognate 'ripeness', this word applies generally
to almost any kind of maturity, even that of Dasein-not merely the maturity of fruits
and vegetables.

Il. 1

Being and Time
289
Ending does not necessarily mean fulfilling oneself. It thus becomes
more urgent to ask in what sense, if any, death must be conceived as the ending
of Dasein.
In the first instance, "ending" signifies "stopping", and it signifies this
in senses which are ontologically different. The rain stops. It is no longer
present-at-hand. The road stops. Such an ending does not make the road
disappear, but such a stopping is determinative for the road as this one,
which is present-at-hand. Renee ending, as stopping, can signify either
"passing over into non-presence-at-hand" or else "Being-present-at-hand
only when the end cornes". The latter kind of ending, in turn, may either
be determinative for something which is present-at-hand in an unfinished
way, as a road breaks offwhen one finds it under construction; or it may
rather constitute the 'finishedness" of something present-at-hand, as the
painting is finished with the last stroke of the brush.
But ending as "getting finished" does not inc1ude fulfilling. On the
other hand, whatever has got to be fulfilled must indeed reach the finished·
ness that is possible for it. Fulfilling is a mode of 'finishedness', and is
founded upon it. Finishedness is itself possible only as a determinate form
of something present-at-hand or ready-to-hand.
Even ending in the sense of "disappearing" can still have its modifications according to the kind of Being which an entity may have. The rain
is at an end-that is to say it has disappeared. The bread is at an endthat is to say, it has been used up and is no longer available as something
ready-to-hand.
By none of these modes of ending can death be suitably characterized as the"end"
of Dasein. If dying, as Being-at-an-end, were understood in the sense of an
ending of the kind we have discussed, then Dasein would thereby be
treated as something present-at-hand or ready-to-hand. In death, Dasein
has not been fulfilled nor has it simply disappeared; it has not become
finished nor is it wholly at one's disposaI as something ready-to-hand.
On the contrary, just as Dasein is already its "not-yet", and is its
"not-yet" constandy as long as it is, it is already its end too. The "ending"
which we have in view when we speak of death, does not signify Dasein's
Being-at-an-end [Zu-Ende-sein], but a Being-towards-the-end [Sein zum
Ende] ofthis entity. Death is a way to be, which Dasein takes over as soon
as it is. "As soon as man cornes to life, he is at once old enough to die.'iv
Ending, as Being-towards-the-end, must be c1arified ontologically in
terms of Dasein's kind of Being. And presumably the possibility of an
existent Being ofthat "not-yet" which lies 'before' the 'end',l will become
1', .. die Moglichkeit eines existierenden Seins des Noch-nicht, das "vor" dem "Ende"
liegt .• .' The eariier editions have'.•. das ja "vor" dem "Ende" .. .'

245

Being and Time
II. 1
intelligible only if the character of ending bas been detennined existentially. The existential clarification of Being-towards-the-end will also
give us for the first time an adequate basis for defining what can possibly
be the meaning ofour talk about a totality ofDasein, if indeed this totality
is to be constituted by death as the 'end'.
Our attempt to understand Dasein's totality by taking as our point
of departure a clarification of the "not-yet" and going on to a characterization of "ending", has not led us to our goal. It has shown only in a
negative way that the "not-yet" which Dasein in every case is, resists
Interpretation as something still outstanding. The end towards which
Dasein is as existing, remains inappropriately defined by the notion of a
"Being-at-an-end". These considerations, however, should at the same
time make it plain that they must be turned back in their course. A positive characterization of the phenomena in question (Being-not-yet,
ending, totality) succeeds only when it is unequivocally oriented to Dasein's
state ofBeing. But ifwe have any insight into the realms where those endstructures and totality-structures which are to be construed ontologically
with Dasein belong, this will, in a negative way, Inake this unequivocal
character secure against wrong turnings.
Ifwe are to carry out a positive Interpretation ofdeath and its character
as an end, by way of existential analysis, we must take as our clue the
basic state ofDasein at which we have already arrived-the phenomenon
ofcare.
290

246

~ 49. How the Existential Ana{ysis of Death is Distinguishedfrom Other Possible
Interpretations of this Phenomenon
The unequivocal character of our ontological Interpretation of death
must first be strengthened by our bringing explicitly to Inind what such
an Interpretation can not inquire about, and what it would he vain to
expect it to give us any information or instructions about. 1
Death, in the widest sense, is a phenomenon oflife. Life must be understood as a kind of Being to which there helongs a Being-in-the-world.
Only if this kind of Being is oriented in a privative way to Dasein, can
we fix its character ontologically. Even Dasein may be considered purely
as life. When the question is fonnulated from the viewpoint ofbiology and
physiology, Dasein moves into that domain of Being which we know as the
world ofanimaIs and plants. In this field, we can obtain data and statistics
about the longevity of plants, animaIs and men, and we do this by ascertaining them ontically. Connections hetween longevity, propagation, and
l '. . . wonach diese nicht fragen, und worüber eine Auskunft und Anweisung von ihr
vergeblich erwartet werden kann.' The older editions have 'kann' after 'fragen', and
'muss' where the newer editions have 'kann'.

II. 1
Being and Time
291
growth may be recognized. The 'kinds' of death, the causes, 'contrivances'
and ways in which it makes its entry, can be explored. v
Underlying this biological-ontical exploration of death is a problematic
that is ontological. We still have to ask how the ontological essence of
death is defined in terms of that oflife. In a certain way, this has always 247
been decided already in the ontical investigation of death. Such investigations operate with preliminary conceptions of life and death, which have
heen more or less clarified. These preliminary conceptions need to be
sketched out by the ontology of Dasein. Within the ontology of Dasein,
which is superordinate to an ontology oflife, the existential analysis of death
is, in turn, subordinate to a characterization of Dasein's basic state. The
ending of that which lives we have called 'perishing'. Dasein too 'has' its
death, of the kind appropriate to anything that lives; and it has it, not in
ontical isolation, but as codetermined by its primordial kind of Being.
In so far as this is the case, Dasein too can end without authentically
dying, though on the other hand, qua Dasein, it does notsimply perish.
We designate this intermediate phenomenon as its "demise".l Let the term
"tlying" stand for that way of Being in which Dasein is towards its death. 2
Accordingly we must say that Dasein never perishes. Dasein, however,
can deInise only as long as it is dying. Medical and biological investigation into "deInising" can ohtain results which may even become significant
ontologically if the basic orientation for an existential Interpretation of
death has been made secure. Or must sickness and death in generaleven from a medical point of view-bc primarily conceived as existential
phenomena?
The existential Interpretation of death takes prccedence over any
biology and ontology oflife. But it is also the foundation for any investigation of death which is biographical or historiological, ethnological or
psychological. In any 'typology' of 'dying', as a characterization of the
conditions under which a demise is 'Experienced' and of the ways in
which it is 'Experienced', the concept of death is already prcsupposed.
Moreover, a psychology of 'dying' gives information about the 'living' of
the person who is 'dying', rather than about dying itself. This simply
reflects the factthatwhen Dasein dies-and even when it dies authentically
-it does not have to do so with an Experience of its factical demising, or
in such an Experience. Likewise the ways in which death is taken among
l'Abkben'. This term, which literally means something like 'living out' one's life, is
used in ordinary German as a rather legalistic term for a person's death. We shall translate
it as 'demise' (both as a noun and as a verb), which also has legalistic connotations. But
this translation is an arbitrary one, and does not adequate1y express the meaning which
Heidegger is explaining.
Il ' •.• Seinsweise, in der das Dasein zu seinem Tode ist.'

29 2
Being and Time
II. 1
primitive peoples, and their ways of comporting themselves towards it in
magic and cult, illuminate primarily the understanding of Dasein; but
the Interpretation of this understanding already requires an existential
analytic and a corresponding conception of death.
On the other hand, in the ontological analysis of Beirig-towards-theend there is no anticipation of our taking any existential stand towards
death. If"death" is defined as the 'end' of Dasein-tbat is 10 say, ofBeingin-the-world-this does not imply any ontical decision whether 'after
death' still another Being is possible, either higher or lower, or whether
Dasein 'lives on' or even 'outlasts' itself and is 'immortal'. Nor is anything
decided ontically about the 'other-worldly' and its possibility, any more
than about the 'this-worldly'; 1 it is not as ifnorms and rules for comporting
oneself towards death were to be proposed for 'edification'. But our
analysis of death remains purely 'this-worldly' in so far as it Interprets
that phenomenon merely in the way in which it enters into any particular
Dasein as a possibility of its Being. Only when death is conceived in its full
ontological essence can we have any methodological assurance ineven asking
what may be after death; only then can we do so with meaning andjustification. Whether such a question is a possible tkeoretical question at all will
not be decided here. The this-worldly ontological Interpretation of death
takes precedence over any ontical other-worldly speculation.
Finally, what might be discussed under the topic of a 'metaphysic of
death' lies outside the domain ofan existential analysis of death. Questions
of how and when death 'came into the world', what 'meaning' it can
have and is to have as an evil and affliction in the aggregate of entitiesthese are questions which necessarily presuppose an understanding not
only of the character of Being which belongs to death, but of the ontology
of the aggregate of entities as a whole, and especially of the ontological
clarification of evil and negativity in general.
Methodologically, the existential analysis is superordinate to the questions of a biology, psychology, theodicy, or theology of death. Taken
ontically, the results ofthe analysis show the peculiar formaliry and emptiness of any ontological characterization. However, that must not blind us
to the rich and complicated structure of the phenomenon. If Dasein in
general never becomes accessible as something present-at-hand, because
Being-possible belongs in its own way to Dasein's kind of Being, even less
may we expect that we can simply read off the ontological structure of
death J if death is indeed a distinctive possibility of Dasein.
On the other hand, the analysis cannot keep clinging to an idea ofdeath

From our considerations of totality, end, and that which is still outstanding, there has emerged the necessity ofInterpreting the phenomenon
of death as Being-towards-the-end, and of doing so in terms of Dasein's
basic state. Only so can it be made plain to what extent Being-a-whole J
as constituted by Being towards-the-end, is possible in Dasein itse1f in
conformity with the structure of its Being. We have seen that care is the
basic state of Dasein. The ontological signification of the expression
"care" has been expressed in the 'definition': "ahead-of-itself-Beingalready-in (the world) as Being-alongside entities which we encounter
(within-the-world)".Vl1 In this are expressed the fundamental characteristics of Dasein's Being: existence, in the "ahead-of-itse1f"; facticity, in the
"Being-already-in"; falling, in the "Being-alongside". If indeed death
be10ngs in a distinctive sense to the Being of Dasein, then death (or Beingtowards-the-end) must be defined in terms of these characteristics.
We must, in the first instance, make plain in a pre1iminary sketch how
Dasein's existence, facticity, and falling reveal themselves in the phenomenon of death.
The Interpretation in which the "not-yet-and with it even the uttermost "not-yet", the end of Dasein:-was taken in the sense of something
still outstanding, has been rejected as inappropriate in that it inc1uded the
ontological perversion of making Dasein something present-at-hand.
Being-at-an-end implies existentially Being-towards-the-end. The uttermost "not-yet" has the character of something towardr which Dasein
comports itself. The end is impending [steht ... bevor] for Dasein. Death is
not something not yet present-at-hand, nor is it that which is ultimate1y

1 'über das "Jenseits" und seine Moglichkeit wird ebensowenig ontisch entsch.ieden
wie über das "Diesseits" .... The quotation marks around "Diesseits" appear only ID the
later editions.

l 'Um so ausdrücklicher muss mit der existenzialen Begriffsbestimmung die existenzielle Unverbindlichkeit zusammengehen ....

II. 1
Being and Time
293
which has been devised accidentally and at random. We can restrain this
arbitrariness only by giving beforehand an ontological characterization of
the kind of Being in which the 'end' enters into Dasein's average everydayness. To do so;we must fully envisage those structures of everydayness
which we have earlier set forth. The fact that in an existential analysis of
death, existentiell possibilities of Being-towards-death are consonant with
it J is implied by the essence of all ontological investigation. All the more
explicitly must the existential definition of concepts be unaccompanied by
any existentiell commitments,l especially with relation to death J in which
Dasein's character as possibility lets itself be revealed most precisely. The
existential problematic aims only at setting forth the ontological structure
of Dasein's Being-towardr-the-end.v1

249

1f 50. Preliminary Sketch of the Existential-ontological Structure of Death

250

294
Being and Time
II. 1
still outstanding but which has been reduced to a minimum. Deatk is
sornetking that stands before us-sornething irnpending. 1
However, there is much that can impend for Dasein as Being-in-theworld. The character of impendence is not distinctive of death. On the
contrary, this Interpretation could even lead us to suppose that death
must be understood in the sense of sorne impending event encountered
environmentaUy. For instance, a storm, the remodelling of the house, or
the arrivaI of a friend, may be impending; and these are entities which are
respectively present-at-hand, ready-to-hand, and there-with-us. The
death which impends does not have this kind ofBeing.
But there may also be impending for Dasein a journey, for instance, or
a disputation with Others, or the forgoing of something of a kind which
Dasein itself can be-its own possibilities of Being, which are based on its
Being with Others.
Death is a possibility-of-Being which Dasein itself has to take over in
every case. With death, Dasein stands before itself in its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. This is a possibility in which the issue is nothing less
than Dasein's Being-in-the-world. Its death is the possibility of no-longer
being-able-to-be-there. 2 If Dasein stands before itself as this possibility,
it has been Jully assigned to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. When it
stands before itself in this way, aU its relations to any other Dasein have
been undone. 3 This ownmost non-relational' possibility is at the same
time the uttermost one.
As potentiality-for-Being, Dasein cannot outstrip the possibility of
death. Death is the possibility of the absolute impossibility of Dasein.
Thus death reveals itself as that possibility which is one's ownmost, whick is
non-relational, and which is not to be outstripped [unüberholbare]. As such, death
is something distinctively impending. 1ts existential possibility is based on the
fact that Dasein is essentiaUy disc10sed to itself, and disc1osed, indeed, as
ahead-of-itself. This item in the structure ofcare has its most primordial concretion in Being-towards-death. As a phenomonon, Being-towards-the-end
l '. • • Sondem eher ein Bevorstand.' While we shaH ordinarily use various forms of
'impend' to translate 'Bevorstand', 'bevorstehen', etc., one must bear in mind that the
literai meaning of these expressions is one of 'standing before', so that they may be quite
plausibly contrasted with 'Ausstehen', etc. ('standing out'). Thus we shaH occasionally
use forms of 'stand before' when this connotation seems to be dominant.
Il 'Nicht-mehr-dasein-kônnens.' Notice that the expressions 'Seinkonnen' (our 'potentiality-for-Being') and 'Nichtmehrdasein' (our 'no-Ionger-Dasein') are here fused. Cf.
H.237-242.
3 'So sich bevorstehend sind in ihm alle Bezüge zu anderem Dasein gelost.'
4. 'unbezügliche'. This term appears frequently throughout the chapter, and, as the
present passage makes clear, indicates that in death Dasein is eut offfrom relations with
others. The term has accordingly been translated as 'non-relational', in the sense of
'devoid of relationships' .

Il. 1
Being and Time
295
becomes plainer as Being towards that distinctive possibility of Dasein
which we have characterized.
This ownmost possibility, however, non-relational and not to be outstripped, is not one which Dasein procures for itself subsequently and
occasionaUy in the course of its Being. On the contrary, if Dasein exists,
it has already been thrown into this possibility. Dasein does not, proximally
and for the most part, have any explicit or even any theoretical knowledge
of the fact that it has been delivered over to its death, and that death thus
belongs to Being-in-the-world. Thrownness into death reveals itself to
Dasein in a more primordial and impressive manner in that state-of-mind
which we have called "anxiety". viii Anxiety in the face of death is anxiety
'in the face of' that potentiality-for-Being which is one's ownmost, nonrelational, and not to be outstripped. That in the face of which one has
anxiety is Being-in-the-world itself. That about which one has this anxiety
is simply Dasein's potentiality-for-Being. Anxiety in the face of death
must not be confused with fear in the face of one's demise. This anxiety
is not an accidentaI or random mood of 'weakness' in sorne individual;
but, as a basic state-of-mind of Dasein, it amounts to the disc10sedness of
the fact that Dasein exists as thrown Being towards its end. Thus the
existential conception of "dying" is made c1ear as thrown Being towards
its ownmost potentiality-for-Being, which is non-relational and not to be
outstripped. Precision is gained by distinguishing this from pure disappearance, and also from merely perishing, and finally from the 'Experiencing' of a demise. 1
Being-towards-the-end does not first arise through sorne attitude which
occasionally emerges, nor does it arise as such an attitude; it belongs
essentially to Dasein's thrownness, which reveals itself in a state-of-mind
(mood) in one way or another. The factical 'knowledge' or 'ignorance'
which prevails in any Dasein as to its ownmost' Being-towards-the-end, is
only the expression of the existentiell possibility that there are different
ways ofmaintaining oneselfin this Being. Factically, there are many who,
proximally and for the most part, do not know about death; but this must
not be passed off as a ground for proving that Being-towards-death does not
belong to Dasein 'universally'. It only proves that proximally and for the
most part Dasein covers up its ownmost Being-towards-death, fleeing in
theJace ofit. Factically, Dasein is dying as long as it exists, but proximally
and for the most part, it does so by way ofJalling. For factical existing is
not only generally and without further difrerentiation a thrown potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world, but it has always likewise been absorbed in
the 'world' of its concern. In this falling Being-alongside, fleeing from
l '. . . gegen ein "Erleben" des Ablebens.' (Cf. Section 49 above.)

252

296
Being and Time
II. 1
uncanniness announces itself; and this means now, a fleeing in the face
of one's ownmost Being-towards-death. Existence, facticity, and falling
characterize Being-towards-the-end, and are therefore constitutive for the
existential conception of death. As regards its ontologùal possibility, dying is
grounded in care.
But if Being-towards-death belongs primordially and essentially to
Dasein's Being, then it must also be exhibitable in everydayness, even if
proximally in a way which is inauthentic. l And if Being-towards-the-end
should afford the existential possibility of an existentiell Being-a-whole for
Dasein, then this would give phenomenal confirmation for the thesis that
"care" is the ontological term for the totality of Dasein's structural whole.
If, however, we are to provide a full phenomenal justification for this
principle, a preliminary sketch of the connection between Being-towardsdeath and care is not sufficient; We must be able to see this connection
above all in that concretion which lies closest to Dasein-its everydayness.
~ 51. Being-towards-death and the Everydayness ofDasein

253

ln setting forth average everyday Being-towards-death, we must take
our orientation from those structures of everydayness at which we have
earlier arrived. In Being-towards-death, Dasein comports itself towards
itself as a distinctive potentiality-for-Being. But the Self of everydayness is
the "they" .Ix The "they" is constituted by the way things have been
publicly interpreted, which expresses itself in idle talk. 2 Idle talk must
accordingly make manifest the way in which everyday Dasein interprets
for itself its Being-towards-death. The foundation of any interpretation
is an act of understanding, which is always accompanied by a state-ofmind, or, in other words, which has a mood. So we must ask how Beingtowards-death is disclosed by the kind of understanding which, with its
state-of-mind, lurks in the idle talk' of the "they". How does the "they"
comport itselfunderstandingly towards that ownmost possibility ofDasein,
which is non-relational and is not to be outstripped? What state-of-Inind
discloses to the "they" that it has been delivered over to death, and in
what way?
ln the publicness with which we are with one another in our everyday
manner, death is 'known' as a Inishap which is constantly occurring-as
a 'case of death'. 3 Someone or other 'dies', be he neighbour or stranger
l ' . • • dann muss es auch-wenngleich zunachst uneigentlich-in der Alltaglichkeit
aufweisbar sein.' The earlier editions have another 'auch' just before 'in der Alltaglichkeit'.
:& ' ••• das sich in der offentlichen Ausgelegtheit konstituiert, die sich im Gerede ausspricht.' The earlier editions have'•.• konstituiert. Sie spricht sich aus im Gerede.'
3 'Die Offentlichkeit des alltaglichen Miteinander "kennt" den Tod ais standig vorkommendes Begegnis, ais "Todesfall".'

II. 1

Being and Time
297
[Nachste oder Femerstehende]. People who are no acquaintances of ours
are 'dying' daily and hourly. 'Death' is encountered as a well-known event
occurring within-the-world. As such it remains in the inconspicuousnessx
characteristic of what is encountered in an everyday fashion. The "they"
has already stowed away [gesichert] an interpretation for this event. It
talks of it in a 'fugitive' manner, either expressly or else in a way which is
mostly inhibited, as if to say, "One of these days one will die too, in the
end; but right now it has nothing to do with US."l
The analysis of the phrase 'one dies' reveals unambiguously the kind
of Being which belongs to everyday Being-towards-death. In such a way
oftalking, death is understood as an indefinite something which, above all,
must duly arrive from somewhere or other, but which is proximally not
yet present-at-hand for oneself, and is therefore no threat. The expression
'one dies' spreads abroad the opinion that what gets reached, as it were,
by death, is the "they". In Dasein's public way of interpreting, it is said
that 'one dies', because everyone else and oneself can talk himself into
saying that "in no case is it 1 myself", for this "one" is the "nobody".2
'Dying' is levelled off to an occurrence which reaches Dasein, to be sure,
but belongs to nobody in particular. If idle talk is always ambiguous, so
is this manner of talking about death. Dying, which is essentially mine
in such a way that no one can be my representative, is perverted into an
event of public occurrence which the "they" encounters. In the way of
talking which we have characterized, death is spoken of as a 'case' which
is constantly occurring. Death gets passed off as always something 'actual';
its character as a possibility gets concealed, and so are the other two
items that belong to it-the fact that it is non-relational and that it is not
to be outstripped. By such ambiguity, Dasein puts itself in the position
of losing itself in the "they" as regards a distinctive potentiality-for-Being
which belongs to Dasein's ownmost Self. The "they" gives its approval,
and aggravates the temptation to coyer up from oneself one's ownmost
Being-towards-death.XI This evasive concealment in the face of death
dominates everydayness so stubbomly that, in Being with one another, the
'neighbours' often still keep talking the 'dying person' into the belief that
he will escape death and soon retum to the tranquillized everydayness of
the world of his concem. Such 'solicitude' is meant to 'console' him. It
insists upon bringing him back into Dasein, while in addition it helps him
l ' . . . man stirbt am Ende auch einmal, aber zunachst bleibt man selbst unbetroffen.'

:& 'Die iiffentliche Daseinsauslegung sagt: "man stirbt", w~il damit j~der andt;re und
man selbst sich einreden kann: je nicht gerade ich; denn ~leses Ma?, !st d~s Nlemand.'
While we have usually followed the convention of translatmg the mdefimte pronoun
'man' as 'one' and the expression 'das Man' as 'the "they" " to do so here would obscure
the point.

254

298
Being and Time
II. 1
to keep bis ownmost non-relational possibility-of-Being completely concealed. In this manner the "they" provides [besorgt] a constant tranquilli~ation about death. At bottom, however, this is a tranquillization not only for
him who is 'dying' butjust as much for those who 'console' him. And even
in the case of a demise, the public is still not to have its own tranquillity
upset by such an event, or be disturbed in the carefreeness with which it
concerns itself. 1 Indeed the dying of Others is seen often enough as a
social inconvenience, if not even a downright tactlessness, against which
the public is to be guarded. xu
But along with this tranquillization, which forces Dasein away from its
death, the "they" at the same time puts itself in the right and makes
itself respectable by tacitly regulating the way inwhich one has to comport
oneself towards death. It is already a matter of public acceptance that
'thinking about death' is a cowardly fear, a sign of insecurity on the part
of Dasein, and a sombre way of fleeing from the world. The "they" does
not permit us the courage for anxiety in the face of death. The dominance of the
manner in which things have been publicly interpreted by the "they",
has already decided what state-of-mind is to determine our attitude
towards death. In anxiety in the face of death, Dasein is brought face to
face with itself as delivered over to that possibility which is not to be
outstripped. The "they" concerns itselfwith transforming this anxiety into
fear in the face of an oncoming event. In addition, the anxiety which has
been made ambiguous as fear, is passed off as a weakness with which no
self-assured Dasein may have any acquaintance; What is 'fitting' [Was
sich .•. "gehôrt"] according to the unuttered decree of the "they", is
indifferent tranquillity as to the 'fact' that one dies. The cultivation of
such a 'superior' indifference alienates Dasein from its ownmost nonrelational potentiality-for-Being.
But temptation, tranquillization, and alienation are distinguishing
marks of the kind of Being called ''Jalling''. As falling, everyday Beingtowards-death is a constant .fleeing in the face of death. Being-towards-the-end
has the mode of evasion in the face of it-giving new explanations for it,
understanding it inauthentically, and concealing it. Factically one's own
Dasein is always dying already; that is to say, it is in a Being-towardsits-end. And it hides this Fact from itself by recoining "death" as just a
"case of death" in Others-an everyday occurrence which, if need be,
gives us the assurance still more plainly that 'oneself' is still 'living'. But
in thus falling and fleeing in the face of death, Dasein's everydayness
attests that the very "they" itself already has the definite character of
l'Und selbst im FalIe des Ablebens noch solI die Offentlichkeit durch das Ereignis
nicht in ihrer besorgten Sorglosigkeit gestôrt und beunruhigt werden.·

II. 1
Being and Time
299
Being-towards-death, evenwhen it is not explicitlyengaged in 'thinkingabout
death'. Even in average everydayness, this ownmost potentiality-Jor-Being, which is
non-relational and not to be outstripped, is constantfy an issue for Dasein. This is
the case when its concern is merefy in the mode ofan untroubled indifference towards
the uttermost possibility of existence. 1
In setting forth everyday Being-towards-death, however, we are at the
same time enjoined to try to secure a full existential conception of Beingtowards-the-end, by a more penetrating Interpretation in which falling
Being-towards-death is taken as an evasion in the face of death. That in the
face of which one flees has been made visible in a way which is phenomenally
adequate. Against this it must be possible to project phenomenologically
the way in which evasive Dasein itselfunderstands its death. xl1l
~ 52. Everyday Being-towards-the-end, and the Full Existential Conception of

Death
In our preliminary existential sketch, Being-towards-the-end has been
defined as Being towards one's ownmost potentiality-for-Being, which is
non-relational and is not to be outstripped. Being towards this possibility,
as a Being which exists, is brought face to face with the absolute impossibility of existence. Beyond this seemingly empty characterization of
Being-towards-death, there has been revealed the concretion of this Being
in the mode of everydayness. In accordance with the tendency to falling,
which is essential to everydayness, Being-towards-death has tumed out to
be an evasion in the face of death-an evasion which conceals. While our
investigation has hitherto passed from a formaI sketch of the ontological
structure of death to the concrete analysis of everyday Being-towards-theend, the direction is now to be reversed, and we shall arrive at the
. full
existential conception of death by rounding out our InterpretatlOn of
everyday Being-towards-the-end.
.
In explicating everyday Being-towards-death we have clung to the Idle
talk of the "they" to the effect that "one dies too, sometime, but not right
away."g AIl that we have Interpreted thus far is the 'one dies' as s~ch ..In
the 'sometime, but not right away', everydayness concedes somethmg hke
a certainty of death. Nobody doubts that one dies. On the other hand, this
'not doubting' need not imply that kind of Being-certain which corresponds to the way death-in the sense of the distinctive possibility characterized above-enters into Dasein. Everydayness confines itself to
1 ' •.• wenn auch nur im Modus des Besorgens einer unbehellic.ten C:leic~gült~gk~t ~egeD d~
liusserste M oglichkeit seiner Existenz.' Ordinarily the expreSSIOn Gleichgü1ugkeit gegen
means simply 'indifference towards'. But Heideg?er'~ us~ of,~oldface.tyPe s~ggests that
here he also has in mind that 'gegen' may mean agaln~t or ln OppositIOn ta •
2 ' ••• man stirbt auch einmal, aber vorlaufig noch mcht.'

255

300
Being and Time
II. 1
conceding the 'certainty' of death in this ambiguous manner just in order
256 to weaken that certainty by covering up dying still more and to aUeviate
its own thrownness into death.
By its very meaning, this evasive concealment in the face of death can
not be authentically 'certain' of death, and yet it is certain of it. What are
we to say about the 'certainty of death' ?
To be certain of an entity means to hold it for true as something true. 1
But "truth" signifies the uncoveredness of sorne entity, and aU uncoveredness is grounded ontologicaUy in the most primordial truth, the diselosedness ofDasein. xtv As an entity which is both diselosed and diselosing, and
one which uncovers, Dasein is essentiaUy 'in the truth'. But certainry is
grounded in the truth, or helongs to it equiprimordially. The expression 'certainty',
like the term 'truth', has a double signification. PrimordiaUy "truth"
means the same as "Being-diselosive", as a way in which Dasein behaves.
From this cornes the derivative signification: "the uncoveredness of
entities". Correspondingly, "certainty", in its primordial signification, is
tantamount to "Being-certain", as a kind of Being which belongs to
Dasein. However, in a derivative signification, any entity of which
Dasein can be certain will also get caUed something 'certain'.
One mode of certainty is conviction. In conviction, Dasein lets the testimony of the thing itself which has been uncovered (the true thing itself)
be the sole determinant for its Being towards that thing understandingly. 2
Holding something for true is adequate as a way of maintaining oneself
in the truth, if it is grounded in the uncovered entity itself, and if, as
Being towards the entity so uncovered, it has become transparent to itself
as regards its appropriateness to that entity. In any arbitrary fiction or in
merely having sorne 'view' ["Ansicht"] about an entity, this sort of thing
is lacking.
The adequacy of holding-for-true is measured according to the truthelaim to which it belongs. Such a elaim gets its justification from the kind
of Being of the entity to be diselosed, and from the direction of the diselosure. The kind of truth, and along with it, the certainty, varies with
the way entities differ, and accords with the guiding tendency and extent
of the diselosure. Our present considerations will be restricted to an
l 'Eines Seienden gewiss-sein besagt: es aIs wahres fUr wahr halten.' The earlier editions
have 'Gewisssein' instead of 'gewiss-sein'. Our literaI but rather unidiomatic translation
of the phrase 'fUr wahr halten' seems desirable in view of Heidegger's extensive use of the
verb 'halten' ('hold') in. subsequent passages where this phrase occurs, though this is
obscured by our translatmg 'halten sich in •• .' as 'maintain itse1f in •• .' and 'halten
sich an .. .' as 'ding to .. .' or 'stick to .. .'.
Il 'In i~r liisst sich das D~ein ei?zig durc~ das Zeugnis der entdeckten (wahre) Sache
se1bst sem verstehendes Sem zu dieser besummen.' The connection between 'überzeugung' ('conviction') and 'Zeugnis' (testimony) is obscured in our translation.

II. 1
Being and Time
301
analysis of Being-certain with regard ta death; and this Being-certain
will in the end present us with a distinctive certainry of Dasein.
For the most part, everyday Dasein covers up the ownmost possibility
of its Being-that possibility which is non-relational and not to be outstripped. This factical tendency to coyer up confirms our thesis that Dasein,
as factical, is in the 'untruth'.xv Therefore the certainty which belongs to
such a covering-up ofBeing-towards-death must be an inappropriate way
of holding-for-true, and not, for instance, an uncertainty in the sense of
a doubting. In inappropriate certainty, that of which one is certain is
held covered up. If 'one' understands death as an event which one
encounters in one's environment, then the certainty which is related to
such events does not pertain to Being-towards-the-end.
They say, "It is certain that 'Death' is coming.'l They say it, and the
"they" overlooks the fact that in order to be able to be certain of
death, Dasein itself must in every case be certain of its ownmost nonrelational potentiality-for-Being. They say, "Death is certain"; and
in saying so, they implant in Dasein the illusion that it is itself certain
of its death. And what is the ground of everyday Being-certain?
Manifestly, it is not just mutual persuasion. Yet the 'dying' of Others
is something that one experiences daily. Death is an undeniable 'fact of
experience'•
The way in which everyday Being-towards-death understands the
certainty which is thus grounded, betrays itself when it tries to 'think'
about death, even when it does so with critical foresight-that is to say,
in an appropriate manner. So far as one knows, aU men 'die'. Death is
probable in the highest degree for everyman, yet it isnot'unconditionaUy'
certain. Taken strictly, a certainty which is 'only' empirical may be attributed to death. Such certainty necessarily faUs short of the highest
certainty, the apodictic, which we reach in certain domains of theoretical
knowledge.
In this 'critical' determination of the certainty of death, and of its
impendence, what is manifested in the first instance is, once again, a
failure to recognize Dasein's kind of Being and the Being-towards-death
which belongs to Dasein-a failure that is characteristic of everydayness.
Thefact that t1emise, as an event which occurs, is 'only' empirically certain, is in no
way decisive as ta the certainry of death. Cases of death may be the factical
occasion for Dasein's first paying attention to deathataU. Solong,however,
as Dasein remains in the empirical certainty which we have mentioned,
death, in the way that it 'is', is something ofwhich Dasein can by no means
become certain. Even though, in the publicness of the "they", Dasein
l'Man sagt: es ist gewiss, dass "der" Tod kommt.'

257

302
Being and Time
II. 1
seems to 'talk' ooly of this 'empirical' certainty of death, neverth~.ess at
bottom Dasein does not exclusively or primarily stick to those cases of
25 8 death which merely occur. In evading its death, even everyday Beingtowards-the-end is indeed certain of its death in another"way than it
might itself like to have true on purely theoretical considerations. This
'other way' is what everydayness for the most part veils from itself. Everydayness does not dare to let itself become transparent in such a manner.
We have already characterized the every-day state-of-mind which consists
in an air of superiority with regard to the certain 'fact' of death-a superiority which is 'anxiously' concerned while seemingly free from anxiety.
ln this state-of-mind, everydayness acknowledges a 'higher' certainty than
one which is ooly empirical. One knows about the certainty of death, and
yet 'is' not authentically certain of one's own. The falling everydayness of
Dasein is acquainted with death's certainty, and yet evades Being-certain.
But in the light of what it evades, this very evasion attests phenomenally
that death must be conceived as one's ownmost possibility, non-relational,
not to be outstripped, and-above all-certain.
One says, "Death certaioly comes, but not right away". With this
'but .. .', the "they" denies that death is certain. 'Not right away' is not
a purely negative assertion, but a way in which the "they" interprets
itself. With this interpretation, the "they" refers itself to that which is
proximally accessible to Dasein and amenable to its concern. Everydayness forces its way into the urgency of concern, and divests itself of the
fetters of a weary 'inactive thinking about death'. Death is deferred to
'sometime later', and this is done by invoking the so-called 'general
opinion' ["allgemeine Ermessen"]. Thus the "they" covers up what is
peculiar in death's certainty-that it is possible at any moment. Along with
the certainty of death goes the indefiniteness of its "when". Everyday Beingtowards-death evades this indefiniteness by conferring definiteness upon it.
But such a procedure cannot signify calculating when the demise is due
to arrive. In the face of definiteness such as this, Dasein would sooner
flee. Everyday concern makes definite for itself the indefiniteness ofcertain
death by interposing before it those urgencies and possibilities which can
be taken in at a glance, and which belong to the everyday matters that
are closest to us.
But when this indefiniteness has been covered up, the certainty has been
covered up too. Thus death's ownmost character as a possibility gets
veiled-a possibility which is certain and at the same time indefinitethat is to say, possible at any moment.
Now that we have completed our Interpretation of the everyday
manner in which the "they" talks about death and the way death enters

Il. 1
Being and Time
303
into Dasein, we have been led to the characters ofcertainty and indefiniteness. The full existential-ontological conception of death may now Le
defined as follows: death, as the end ofDasein, is Dasein's ownmost possibilitynon-relational, certain and as such indefinite, not to be outstripped. Death is, as
Dasein's end, in the Being of this entity towards its end.
Defining the existential structure of Being-towards-the-end helps us to
work out a kind of Being of Dasein in which Dasein, as Dasein, can be a
whole. The fact that even everyday Dasein already is towards its end-that
is to say, is constantly coming to grips with its death, though in a 'fugitive'
manner-shows that this end, conclusive [abschliessende] and determinative for Being-a-whole, is not something to which Dasein ultimately comes
ooly in its demise. In Dasein, as being towards its death, its own uttermost "not-yet" has already been included-that "not-yet" which all
others lie ahead of. 1 So if one has given an ontologically inappropriate
Interpretation of Dasein's "not-yet" as something still outstanding, any
formaI inference from this to Dasein's lack of totality will not be correct.
The phenomenon of the "not-yet" kas been taken over from the "ahead-of-itself" ;
no more than the care-structure in general, can it serve as a higher court which would
mle against the possibility of an existent Being-a-whole; indeed this "ahead-ofitself" is what first of al! makes such a Being-towards-the-end possible. The
problem of the possible Being-a-whole of that entity which each of us is,
is a correct one if care, as Dasein's basic state, is 'connected' with death
-the uttermost possibility for that entity.
Meanwhile, it remains questionable whether this problem has been as
yet adequately worked out. Being-towards-death is grounded in care.
Dasein, as thrown Being-in-the-world, has in every case already been
delivered over to its death. In being towards its death, Dasein is dying
factically and indeed constantly, as long as it has not yet come to its demise.
When we say that Dasein is factically dying, we are saying at the same time
that in its Being-towards-death Dasein has always decided itself in one
way or another. Our everyday falling evasion in the face of death is an
inauthentic Being-towards-death. But inauthenticity is based on the possibility of authenticity.xvl Inauthenticity characterizes a kind of Being
into which Dasein can divert itself and has for the most part always
diverted itself; but Dasein does not necessarily and constantly have to
divert itself into this kind of Being. Because Dasein exists, it determines its
l ' • • • dem alle anderen vorgelagert sind . • .' This clause is ambiguous, both in the
German and in our translation, though the point is fairly clear. The ultimate 'not-yet' is
not one which all others 'lie ahead of' in the sense that they lie beyond it or come after
it; for nothing can 'lie ahead of it' in this sense. But they can 'lie ahead of it' in the sense
that they might be actualized before the ultimate 'not-yet' has been actualized. (Contrast
this passage with H. 302, where the same participle 'vorgelagert' is apparently applied
in the former sense to death itself. )

259

260

304
Being and Time
II. 1
own character as the kind of entity it is, and it does so in every case in
terms of a possibility which it itself is and which it understands. 1
Can Dasein also understand authentically its ownmost possibility, which is
non-relational and not to be outstripped, which is certain and, as such,
indefinite? That is, can Dasein maintain itself in an authentic Beingtowards-its-end? As long as this authentic Being-towards-death has not
been set forth and ontologically defined, there is something essentially
lacking in our existential Interpretation of Being-towards-the-end.
Authentic Being-towards-death signifies an existentiell possibility of
Dasein. This ontical potentiality-for-Being must, in turn, be ontologically
possible. What are the existential conditions of this possibility? How are
they themselves to become accessible?
~ 53. Existential Projection of an Authentic Being-towards-death

Factically, Dasein maintains itself proximally and for the most part in
an inauthentic Being-towards-death. How is the ontological possibility of
an authentic Being-towards-death to be characterized 'Objectively', if, in
the end, Dasein never comports itself authentically towards its end, or if,
in accordance with its very meaning, this authentic Being must remain
hidden from the Others? Is it not a fanciful undertaking, to project the
existential possibility of so questionable an existentiell potentiality-forBeing? What is needed, if such a projection is to go beyond a merely
fictitious arbitrary construction? Does Dasein itself give us any instructions for carrying it out? And can any grounds for its phenomenal
legitimacy be taken from Dasein itself? Can pur analysis of Dasein up to
this point give us any prescriptions for the ontological task we have now
set ourselves, so that what we have before us may be kept on a road of
which we can be sure?
The existential conception of death has been established; and therewith
we have also established what it is that an authentic Being-towards-theend should be able to comport itselftowards. We have also characterized
inauthentic Being-towards-death, and thus we have prescribed in a
negative way [prohibitiv] how it is possible for authentic Being-towardsdeath not to be. It is with these positive and prohibitive instructions that
the existential edifice of an authentic Being-towards-death must let itself
be projected.
Dasein is constituted by disclosedness-that is, by an understanding
with a state-of-mind. Authentic Being-towards-death can not evade its ownmost non-relational possibility, or cover up this possibility by thus fleeing
l'Weil das Dasein existiert, bestimmt es sich aIs Seiendes, wie es ist, je aus einer
Môglichkeit, die es selbst ist und versteht.'

II. 1
Being and Time
30 5
from it, or give a new explanation for it to accord with the common sense of
the "they". In our existential projection of an authentic Being-towardsdeath, therefore, we must set forth those items in such a Being which are
constitutive for it as an understanding of death-and as such an understanding in the sense of Being towards this possibility without either
fleeing it or covering it up.
In the first instance, we must characterize Being-towards-death as a 261
Being towards a possibiliry-indeed, towards a distinctive possibility of
Dasein itself. "Being towards" a possibility-that is to say, towards something possible-may signify "Being out for" something possible, as in
concerning ourselves with its actualization. Such possibilities are constantly encountered in the field of what is rcady-to-hand and present-athand-what is attainable, controllable, practicable, and the like. In
concernfully Being out for something possible, there is a tendency to
annihilate the possibility of the possible by making it available to us. But the
concernful actualization of equipment which is ready-to-hand (as in
producing it, getting it ready, readjusting it, and so on) is always merely
relative, since even that which has been actualized is still characterized
in terms of some involvements-indeed this is precisely what characterizes
its Being. Even though actualized, it remains, as actual, something possible for doing something; it is characterized by an "in-order-to". What
our analysis is to make plain is simply how Being out for something concernfully, comports itself towards the possible: it does so not by the
theoretico-thematical consideration of the possible as possible, and by
having regard for its possibility as such, but rather by looking circumspectively away from the possible and looking at that for which it is possible
[das Wofür-moglich].
Manifestly Being-towards-death, which is now in question, cannot have
the character of concernfully Being out to get itself actualized. For one
thing, death as possible is not something possible which is ready-to-hand
or present-at-hand, but a possibility of Dasein's Being. So to concern
oneself with actualizing what is thus possible would have to signify,
"bringing about one's demise". But if this were done, Dasein would
deprive itself of the very ground for an existing Being-towards-death.
Thus, ifby "Being towards death" we do not have in view an 'actualizing' of death, neitheJ:' can we mean "dwelling upon the end in its possibility". This is the way one comports oneself when one 'thinks about
death', pondering over when and how this possibility may perhaps be
actualized. Of course such brooding over death does not fully take away
from it its character as a possibility. Indeed, it always gets brooded over as
something that is coming; but in such broodingweweaken it bycalculating

262

306
Being and Time
II. 1
how we are to have it at our disposaI. As something possible, it is to
show as little as possible of its possibility. On the other hand, if Beingtowards-death has to disclose understandingly the possibility which we
have characterized, and if it is to disclose it as a possibility, then in such
Being-towards-death this possibility must not be weakened: it must be
understood as a possibility, it must be cultivated as a possibility, and we must
put up with it as a possibility, in the way we comport ourselves towards it.
However, Dasein comports itself towards something possible in its
possibility by expecting it [im Erwarten]. Anyone who is intent on something
possible, may encounter it unimpeded and undiminished in its 'whether
it comes or does not, or whether it comes after aIl'.1 But with this phenomenon of expecting, has not our analysis reached the same kind of Being
towards the possible to which we have already called attention in our
description of "Being out for something" concernfuIly? To expect something possible is always to understand it and to 'have' it with regard. to
whether and when and how it will be actually present-at-hand. Expecting
is not just an occasional looking-away from the possible ta its possible
actualization, but is essentially a waiting for that actuali;;;ation [ein Warten
auf diese]. Even in expecting, one leaps away from the possible and gets a
foothold in the actuai. It is for its actuality that what is expected is
expected. By the very nature of expecting, the possible is drawn into the
2
•
actual, arising out of the actual and returning to it.
But Being towards this possibility, as Being-towards-death, IS so to
comport ourselves towards death that in this Being, and for it, death
reveals itself as a possibility. Our terminology for such Being towards this
possibility is "anticipation" of this possibility. 3 But in this way of behaving
does there not lurk a coming-close to the possible, and when one is close
to the possible, does not its actualization emerge? In this kind of coming
close, however, one does not tend towards concernfully making available
something actual; but as one comes doser understandingly, the possibility of the possible just becomes 'greater'. The closest closeness which one
may have in Being towards death as a possibility, is as far as possiblefrom anything
l 'Für ein Gespanntsein auf es vermag ein Môgliches in seinem "ob oder nicht oder
schliesslich doch" ungehindert und ungeschmaIert zu begegnen.'
2 'Auch im Erwarten liegt ein Abspringen vom Môglichen und Fussfassen iIIl; Wirklichen, dafür das Erwartete erwartet ist. Yom Wirklichen aus und auf es zu wlrd das
Mogliche in das Wirkliche erwartungsmassig hereingezogen.'
3 ' ••• Vorlaufen in die M oglichkeit.' While we have used .'anticip~te' to translate 'vorgreifen', which occurs rather se1dom, we shaH a1so use It-less hte~ally-to transl~te
'vorlaufen', which appears very often in the following pages, and :wh~ch has the specIal
connotation of 'running ahead'. But as Heidegger's remarks have mdi~at~d, th~ !Und of
'anticipation' which is involved in Being-towards-death, does not COnslSt m 'waltmg for
death or 'dwelling upon il' or :actualizing' it before it normally comes; nor does
'running ahead into it' in this se~e mean that we 'rush headlong into it'.

Being and Time
307
actual. The more unveiledly this possibility gets understood, the more
purely does the understanding penetrate into it as the possibility of the
impossibility ofany existence at aU. Death, as possibility, gives Dasein nothing
to be 'actualized', nothing which Dasein, as actual, could itself be. It is
the possibility of the impossibility of every way of comporting oneself
towards anything, of every way of existing. In the anticipation of this
possibility it becomes 'greater and greater'; that is to say, the possibility
reveals itself to be such that it knows no measure at aIl, no more or less,
but signifies the possibility of the measureless impossibility of existence.
In accordance with its essence, this possibility offers no support for
becoming intent on something, 'picturing' to oneself the actuality which
is possible, and so forgetting its possibility. Being-towards-death, as anticipation of possibility, is what first makes this possibility possible, and sets
it free as possibility.
Being-towards-death is the anticipation of a potentiality-for-Being of
that entity whose kind of Being is anticipation itself.1 In the anticipatory
revealing of this potentiality-for-Being, Dasein discloses itself to itself as
regards its uttermost possibility. But to project itself on its ownmost
potentiality-for-Being means to be able to understand itself in the Being
of the entity so revealed-namely, to exist. Anticipation turns out to be
the possibility of understanding one's ownmost and uttermost potentialityfor-Being-that is to say, the possibilityof authentic existence. The ontological
constitution of such existence must be made visible by setting forth the
concrete structure of anticipation of death. How are we to delimit this
structure phenomenaIly? Manifestly, we must do so by determining those
characteristics which must belong to an anticipatory disclosure so that it
can become the pure understanding of that ownmost possibility which is
non-relational and not to be outstripped-which is certain and, as such,
indefinite. It must be noted that understanding does not primarily mean
just gazing at a meaning, but rather understanding oneself in that potentiality-for-Being which reveals itself in projection. xvU
Death is Dasein's ownmost possibility. Being towards this possibility discloses to Dasein its ownmost potentiality-for-Being, in which its very Being is
the issue. Here it can become manifest to Dasein that in this distinctive
possibility of its own self, it has been wrenched away from the "they".
This means that in anticipation any Dasein can have wrenched itselfaway
from the "they" already. But when one understands that this is something
which Dasein 'can' have done, this only reveals its facticallostness in the
everydayness of the they-self.
II. 1

l ' ••• dessen Seinsart das Vorlaufen se1bst ist.' The earlier editions have 'hat' instead

of 'isl'.

263

308
Being and Time
II. 1
The ownmost possibility is non-relational. Anticipation allows Dasein to
understand that that potentiality-for-being in which its ownmost Being is
an issue, must be taken over by Dasein alone. Death does notjust 'belong'
to one's own Dasein in an undifferentiated way; death Lays claim to it as
an individual Dasein. The non-relational character of death, as understood
in anticipation, individualizes Dasein down to itself. This individualizing
is a way in which the 'there' is disclosed for existence. It makes manifest
that all Being-alongside the things with which we concem ourselves, and
aIl Being-with Others, will fail us when our ownmost potentiality-forBeingis the issue. Dasein ,can be authenticall;y itself only if it makes this
possible for itself of its own accord. But if concem and solicitude fail us,
this does not signify at aIl that these ways of Dasein have been cut off
from its authentically Being-its-Self. As structures essential to Dasein's
constitution, these have a share in conditioning the possibility of any
existence whatsoever. Dasein is authentically itself only to the extent that,
as concernful Being-alongside and solicitous Being-with, it projects itself
upon its ownmost potentiality-for-Being rather than upon the possibility
ofthe they-self. The entity which anticipates its non-relational possibility,
is thus forced by that very anticipation into the possibility of taking over
from itself its ownmost Being, and doing so of its own accord.
The ownmost, non-relational possibility is not ta be outstripped. Being
towards this possibility enables Dasein to understand that giving itself up
impends for it as the uttermost possibility of its existence. Anticipation,
however, unlike inauthentic Being-towards-death, does not evade the
fact that death is not to be outstripped; instead, anticipation frees itself
for accepting this. When, byanticipation, one becomes freefor one's own
death, one is liberated from one's lostness in those possibilities which may
accidentally thrust theInselves upon one; and one is liberated in such a
way that for the first time one can authentically understand and choose
among the factical possibilities lying ahead of that possibility which is
not to be outstripped. 1 Anticipation discloses to existence that its uttermost possibility lies in giving itself up, and thus it shatters aIl one's tenaciousness to whatever existence one has reached. In anticipation, Dasein
guards itself a~ainst falling back behind itself, or behind the potentialityfor-Being which it has understood. It guards itself against 'becoming too
old for its victories' (Nietzsche). Free for its ownmost possibilities, which
are determined by the end and so are understood asfinite [endliche], Dasein
dispels the danger that it may, by its own finite understanding ofexistence,
fail to recognize that it is getting outstripped by the existence-possibilities
of Others, or rather that it may explain these possibilities wrongly and
l ' ••• die der unüberholbaren vorgelagert sind.' See note l, p. 303, H. 259 above.

II. 1
Being and Time
30 9
force them back upon its own, so that it may divest itself of its ownmost
factical existence. As the non-relational possibility, death individualizes
-but only in such a manner that, as the possibilitywhich is not to be outstripped, it makes Dasein, as Being-with, have some understan:ding of the
potentiality-for-Being ofOthers. Since anticipation of the possibility which
is not to be outstripped discloses also aIl the possibilities which lie ahead
of that possibility, this anticipation includes the possibility of taking the
whole of Dasein in advance [Vorwegnehmens] in an existentiell manner;
that is to say, it includes the possibility of existing as a whole potentialityfor-Being.
The ownmost, non-relational possibility, which is not to be outstripped,
is certain. The way to be certain of it is determined by the kind of truth
which corresponds to it (disclosedness). The certain possibility of death,
however, discloses Dasein as a possibility, but does so only in such a way
that, in anticipating this possibility, Dasein makes this possibility possible for
itself as its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. 1 The possibility is disclosed
because it is made possible in anticipation. To maintain oneself in this
truth-that is, to be certain of what has been disclosed-demands aIl
the more that one should anticipate. We cannot compute the certainty of
death by ascertaining how many cases of death we encounter. This
certainty is by no means of the kind which maintains itself in the truth of
the present-at-hand. When something present-at-hand has been uncovered, it is encountered most purely ifwejust look at the entity and let
it be encountered in itself. Dasein must first have lost itself in the factual
circumstances [Sachverhalte] (this can be one of care's own tasks and 265
possibilities) if it is to obtain the pure objectivity-that is to say, the
indifference-of apodictic evidence. If Being-certain in relation to death
does not have this character, this does not mean thatlt is ofa lower grade,
but that it does not belong at aU to the graded order of the kinds of evidence we can
have about the present-at-hand.
Holding death for true (death is just one's own) shows another kind of
certainty, and is more primordial than any certainty which relates to
entities encountered within-the-world, or to formaI objects; for it is
certain of Being-in-the-world. As such, holding death for true does not
demandjust one definite kind ofbehaviour in Dasein, but demands Dasein
l'Die gewisse Moglichkeit des Todes erschliesst das Dasein aber ais Moglichkeit nur
so, dass es vorlaufend zu ihr diese Moglichkeit ais eigenstes Seinkonnen für sich mnoglicht.' While we have taken 'Die gewisse Moglichkeit des Todes' as the subject of this
puzzling sentence, 'das Dasein' may be the subject instea? ;rhe; ~e o.f t~e preposi:i,?~ 'zu'
Instead of the usuai 'in' after 'vorlaufend' suggests that m antlClpatmg the pOSSlblhty of
death, Dasein is here thought of.as 'running ahead' towards i.t o~ up to,it rather :~a1?- inu: it;
When this construction occurs m later passages, we shaH mdlcate It by subJommg zu
in brackets.

266

3 10
Being and Time
II. 1
xv111
itself in the full authenticity of its existence.
ln anticipation Dasein
can first make certain of its ownmost Being in its totality-a totality
which is not to be outstripped. Therefore the evidential character which
belongs to the immediate givenness of Experiences, of the "1", or of
consciousness, must necessarily lag behind the certainty which anticipation includes. Yet this is not because the way in which these are grasped
would not be a rigorous one, but because in principle such a way of
grasping them cannot holdfor true (disclosed) something which at bot~om
it insists upon 'having there' as true: namely, Dasein itself, which 1
myself am, and which, as a potentiality-for-Being, 1 can be authentically
only by anticipation.
The ownmost possibility, which ig..non-rt:l~tional, not to be outstripped,
and certain, is indefinite as regards its certainty. l-Iow does anticipation
disclose this characteristic of Dasein's distinctive possibility? How does the
anticipatory understanding project itself upon a potentiality-for-Being
which is certain and which is constantly possible in such a way that the
"when" in which the utter impossibility of existence becomes possible
remains constantly indefinite? ln anticipating [zum] the indefinite
certainty of death, Dasein opens itself to a constant threat arising out of its
own "there". In this very threat Being-towards-the-end must maintain
itself. So little can it tone this down that it must rather cultivate the
indefiniteness of the certainty. How is it existentially possible for this
constant threat to be genuinely disclosed? AlI understanding is accompanied by a state-of-mind. Dasein's mood brings it face to face with the
thrownness of its 'that it is there' .xlx But the state-oJ-mind which can hoid
open the utter and constant threat to itself arisingftom Dasein's ownmost individual·
ized Being, is anxiery.xx 1 In this state-of-mind, Dasein finds itselfface to face
with the "nothing" of the possible impossibility of its existence. Anxiety
is anxious about the potentiality-for-Being of the entity so destined [des so
bestimmten Seienden], and in this way it discloses the uttermost possibility. Anticipation utterly individualizes Dasein, and allows it, in this
individualization of itself, to become certain of the totality of its potentiality-for-Being. For this reason, anxiety as a basic state-of-mind belongs
2
to such a self-understanding of Dasein on the basis of Dasein itself.
Being-towards-death is essentially anxiety. This is attested unmistakably,
though 'only' indirectly, by Being-towards-death as we have described it,
1 'Die BejindlichJceit- aber, welche die stiindige und schlechthinnige, aus dem eigensten vereinzelten
Sein des Dasiens aufsteigende Bedrohung seiner selbst offen zu halten vmnag, ist die Angst.' Not!ce
that 'welche' may be construed either as the subject or as the direct object of the relatIve
clause.
.
2 ' • • • gehiirt zu diesem Sichverstehen des Daseins aus seinem Grunde die Gnmd-.
befindlichkeit der Angst.' It is not grammatically c1ear whether 'seinem' refers to 'S~ch­
verstehen' or to 'Daseins'.

Il. 1

Being and Time
311
when it perverts anxiety into cowardly fear and, in surmounting this fear,
only makes known its own cowardliness in the face ofanxiety.
We may now summarize our characterization of authentic Beingtowards-death as we have projected it existentiaIly: anticipation reveals to
Dasein its lostness in the they-self, and brings it face to face with the possibility of
being itself, primarily unsupported by concemful solicitude, but of being itself, rather,
in an impassioned freedom towards death-afreedom which has bem released
from the Illusions of the "they", and which is factical, certain of itself, and anxious.
AlI the relationships which belong to Being-towards-death, up to the
full content of Dasein's uttermost possibility, as we have characterized it,
constitute an anticipation which they combine in revealing, unfolding,
and holding fast, as that which makes this possibility possible. The existential projection in which anticipation has been delimited, has made visible
the ontological possibility of an existentiell Being-towards-death which is
authentic. Therewith, however, the possibility of Dasein's having an
authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole emerges, but only as an ontological
possibiliry. In our existential projection of anticipation, we have of course
dung to those structures of Dasein which we have arrived at earlier, and
we have, as it were, let Dasein itself project itself upon this possibility,
without holding up to Dasein an ideal of existence with any special 'content', or forcing any such ideal upon it 'from outside'. Nevertheless, this
existentially 'possible' Being-towards-death remains, from the existentiell
point ofview, afantastical exaction. Thefact that an authenticpotentialityfor-Being-a-whole is ontologically possible for Dasein, signifies nothing, so
long as a correspondingontical potentiality-for-Being has not been demonstrated in Dasein itself. Does Dasein ever factically throw itself into such
a Being-towards-death? Does Dasein demand, even by reason of its ownmostBeing, an authentic potentiality-for-Being determined by anticipation?
Before answering these questions, we must investigate whether to any 267
extent and in anyway Dasein gives testimony, from its ownmost potentialityfor-Being, as to a possible authenticity of its existence, so that it not only
makes known that in an existentiell manner such authenticity is possible,
but demands this of itself.
The question of Dasein's authentic Being-a-whole and of its existential
constitution still hangs in mid-air. It can be put on a phenomenal basis
which will stand the test only if it can ding to a possible authenticity of
its Being which is attested by Dasein itself. If we succeed in uncovering
that attestation phenomenologically, together with what it attests, then
the problem will arise anew as to whether the anticipation of [zum] death,
which we have hitherto projected only in its ontological possibility, kas an essential
connection with that authentic potentiality-for-Being which has been attested.

II
DASEIN'S ATTESTATION OF AN AUTHENTIC
POTENTIALITY-FOR-BEING, AND RESOLUTENESS

268

~ 54. The Problem of How an Authentic Existentiell Possibility is Attested.
WHAT we are seeking is an authentic potentiality-for-Being of Dasein,
which will be attested in its existentiell possibility by Dasein itself. But
this very attestation must first be such that we can find it. If in this
attestation, Dasein itself, as something for which authentic existence is
possible, is to be 'given' to Dasein 'to understand',l this attestation will
have its roots in Dasein's Being. So in exhibiting it phenomenologicaIly,
we inc1ude a demonstration that in Dasein's state ofBeing it has its source.
ln this attestation an authentic potentiality-Jor-Being-one's-Self is to be
given us to understand. The question of the "who" of Dasein has been
answered with the expression 'Self'.1 Dasein's Selfhood has been defined
formally as a way of existing, and therefore not as an entity present-at-hand.
For the most part 1 myselfam not the "who" ofDasein; the they-selfis its
"who". Authentic Being-one's-Self takes the definite form of an existentiell modification of the "they"; and this modification must be
defined existentiaIly.u What does this modification imply, and what are
the ontological conditions for its possibility?
With Dasein's lostness in the "they", that factical potentiality-forBeing which is c10sest to it (the tasks, rules, and standards, the urgency and
extent, of concernful and solicitous Being-in-the-world) has already been
decided upon. The "they" has always kept Dasein from taking hold of
these possibilities of Being. The "they" even hides the manner in which it
has tacitly relieved Dasein of the burden of explicitly choosing these
\
possibilities. It remains indefinite who has 'reaIly' done the choosing. So
Dasein make no choices, gets carried along by the nobody, and thus
ensnares itself in inauthenticity. This process can be reversed only if
Dasein specifically brings itselfback to itselffrom its lostness in the "they".
But this bringing-back must have that kind of Being by the neglect of which
l ' ••• wenn sie dem Dasein es selbst in seiner moglichen eigentlichen Existem: "l!:U
verstehen geben" •. .'
--

II. 2
Being and Time
313
Dasein has lost itselfin inauthenticity. WhenDasein thus brings itselfback
[Das Skhzurückholen] from the "they", the they-self is modified in an
existentiell manner so that it l>ecomes authentic Being-one's-Self. This must
be accomplished by making up for not choosing [Nachholen einer Wahl].
But "making up" for not choosing signifies choosing to make this choicedeciding for a potentiality-for-Being, and making this decision from one's
own Self. In choosing to make this choice, Dasein makes possible, first and
foremost, its authentic potentiality-for-Being.
But because Dasein is lost in the "they", it must first find itself. In order
to find itself at aIl, it must be 'shown' to itself in its possible authenticity.
ln terms of its possibility, Dasein is already a potentiality-for-Being-its-Self,
but it needs to have this potentiality attested.
ln the following Interpretation we shall c1aim that this potentiality is
attested by that which, in Dasein's everyday interpretation of itself, is
familiar to us as the "voice of conscience" [Stimme des Gewissens].1U That the
very 'fact' of conscience has been disputed, that its function as a higher
court for Dasein's existence has been variously assessed, and that 'what
conscience says' has been interpreted in manifold ways-aIl this might
only mislead us into dismissing this phenomenon if the very 'doubtfulness'
of this Fact-or of the way in which it has been interpreted---did not prove
that here a primordial phenomenon ofDasein lies before us. In the following
analysis conscience will be taken as something which we have in advance
theoreticaIly, and it will be investigated in a purely existential mannner,
with fundamental ontology as our aim.
We shall first trace conscience back to its existential foundations and
structures and make it visible as a phenomenon of Dasein, holding fast 269
to what we have hitherto arrived at as that entity's state of Being. The,
ontological analysis of conscience on which we are thus embarking, is
prior to any description and classification of Experiences of conscience,
and likewise lies outside ofany biological 'explanation' of this phenomenon
(which would mean its dissolution). But it is no less distant from a theological exegesis of conscience or any employment of this phenomenon for
proofs of Gad or for establishing an 'immediate' consciousness of Gad.
Nevertheless, even when our investigation of conscience is thus restricted, we must neither exaggerate its outcome nor make perverse claims
about it and lessen its worth. As a phenomenon of Dasein, conscience is
not just a fact which occurs and is occasionally present-at-hand. It 'is'
only in Dasein's kind of Being, and it makes itself known as a Fact only
wi th factical existence and in it. The demand that an 'inductive empirical
proof' should be given for the 'factuality' of conscience and for the
legitimacy of its 'voice', rests upon an ontological perversion of the

27°

314
Being and Time
II. 2
phenomenon. This perversion, however, is one that is shared by every
"superior" criticism in which conscience is taken as something just
occurring from time to time rather than as a 'universally established and
ascertainable fact'. Among such proofs and counterproofs, the Fact of
conscience cannot present itself at aIl. This is no lack in it, but merely a
sign by which we can recognize it as ontologically of a different kind from
what is environmentally present-at-hand.
Conscience gives us 'something' to understand; it discloses. By
characterizing this phenomenon formally in this way, we find ourselves
enjoined to take it back into the disclosedness of Dasein. This disclosedness,
as a basic state of that entity which we ourselves are, is constituted by
state-of-mind, understanding, falling, and discourse. If we analyse conscience more penetratingly, it is revealed as a call [Ruf]. Calling is a mode
of discourse. The calI of conscience has the character of an appeal to Dasein
by calling it to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self; and this is
done by way of summoning it to its ownmost Being-guilty.l
This existential Interpretation is necessarily a far cry from everyday
ontical common sense, though it sets forth the ontological foundations of
what the ordinary way of interpreting conscience has always understood
within certain limits and has conceptualized as a 'theory' of conscience.
Accordingly our existential Interpretation needs to be confirmed by a
critique of the way in which conscience is ordinarily interpreted. When
this phenomenon has been exhibited, we can bring out the extent to which
it attests an authentic potentiality-for-Being of Dasein. To the caU of
conscience there corresponds a possible hearing. Our understanding of
the appeal unveils itself as our wanting to have a conscience [Gewissenhabenwollen]. But in this phenomenon lies that existentiell choosing which we
seek-the choosing to choose a kind of Being-one's-Selfwhich, in accordance with its existential structure, we caU "resoluteness". 2 Thus we can see
how the analyses of this chapter are divided up: the existential-ontol'Der Gewissensruf hat den Charakter des Anrufs des Daseins auf sein eigenstes Selbstseinkomîen und das in der Weise des Aufrufs zum eigens.ten Schuldigsein.' Our tran~la­
tion of 'Anruf' as 'appeal' and of 'Aufruf' as 'summomng' conceals the etymologl~al
connection ofthese expressions with 'Ruf', which we here translate as 'call'-a word WhlCh
we have already used in translating expressions such as 'nennen', 'heissen', and a number
of others. The verb 'anrufen' ('appeal') means literally 'to cali to'; 'einen auf etwas
anrufen' means 'to cali to someone and cali him to something'. Similarly 'aufrufen'
('summon') means 'to cali up'; 'einen zu etwas arifrufen' means 'to cali someone .up to
something which he is to do', in the sense of challenging him or 'calling' him to a hlgher
. ,
.,
level of performance.
Il ' ••• das gesuchte existenzielle Wiihlen der Wahl emes Selbstsems, das wlr, Sel?er
existentialen Struktur entsprechend, die Entschlossenheit nennen.' While our verSIOn
preserves the grammatical ambiguity of the German, it seems clear fr?m H. 2g8 that the
antecedent of the second relative clause is 'Selbstsein' ('a kind of Bemg-one's-self'), not
'Wiihlen' ('choosing').

II. 2
Being and Time
315
logical foundations of conscience (Section 55) ; the character of conscience
as a caU (Section 56); conscience as the caU of care (Section 57); understanding the appeal, and guilt (Section 58); the existential Interpretation
of conscience and the way conscience is ordinarily interpreted (Section
59) ; the existential structure of the authentic potentiality-for-Being which
is attested in the conscience (Section 60).

of Conscience
In the phenomenon of conscience we find, without further differentiation, that in sorne way it gives us something to understand. Our analysis
of it takes its departure from this finding. Conscience discloses, and thus
belongs within the range of those existential phenomena which constitute
the Being of the "there" as disclosedness. 1v We have analysed the most
universal structures ofstate-of-mind, understanding, discourse and falling.
If we now bring conscience into this phenomenal context, this is not a
matter of applying these structures schemàticaUy to a special 'case' of
Dasein's disclosure. On the contrary, our Interpretation of conscience not
only will carry further our earlier analysis of the disclosedness of the
"there", but it will also grasp it more primordially with regard to
Dasein's authentic Being.
Through disclosedness, that entity which we caU "Dasein" is in the
possibility of being its "there". With its world, it is there for itself, and
indeed-proximally and for the most part-in such a way that it has
disclosed to itself its potentiality-for-Being in terms of the 'world' of its
concern. Dasein exists as a potentiality-for-Being which has, in each case,
already abandoned itself to definite possibilities. 1 And it has abandoned
itself to these possibilities because it is an entity which has been thrown,
and an entity whose thrownness gets disclosed more or less plainly and
impressively by its having a mood. To any state-of-minp. or mood, understanding belongs equiprimordially. In this way Dasein 'knows' what it is
itself capable of [woran es mit ihm selbst ist], inasmuch as it has either
projected itself upon possibilities of its own or has been so absorbed in the
"they" that it has let such possibilities be presented to it by the way in
which the "they" has publicly interpreted things. The presenting of these
possibilities, however, is made possible existentially through the fact
that Dasein, as a Being-with which understands, can listen to Others.
Losing itselfin the publicness and the idle talk ofthe"they",itfails to hear
[iiberhOrt] its own Self in listening to the they-self. If Dasein is to be able
to get brought back from this lostness of failing to hear itself, and if this
is to be done through itself, then it must first be able to find itself-to find
~ 55, The Existential-ontological Foundations

l 'Das Seinkônnen, aIs welches das Dasein existiert, hat sich je schon bestimmten
Moglichkeiten überlassen.'

27 1

Being and Time
II. 2
itself as something which has failed to hear itself, and which fails to hear
in that it [istens away to the "they".1 This listening-away must get broken
off; in other words, the possibility of another kind of hearing which
will interrupt it, must be given by Dasein itself. 2 The possibility of its
thus getting broken off lies in its being appealed to without mediation.
Dasein fails to hear itself, and listens away to the "they"; and this
listening-away gets broken by the call if that call, in accordance with its
character as such, arouses another kind of hearing, which, in relationship
to the hearing that is 10st,3 has a character in every way opposite. Ifin
this lost hearing, one has been fascinated with the 'hubbub' of the manifold
ambiguity which idle talk possesses in its everyday 'newness', then the call
must do its calling without any hubbub and unambiguously, leaving
no foothold for curiosity. That which, by calling in this manner, gives us ta
understand, is the conscience.
We take caUing as a mode of discourse. Discourse articulates
intelligibility. Characterizing conscience as a call is not just giving a
'picture', like the Kantian representation of the conscience as a court of
justice. Vocal utterance, however, is not essential for discourse, and therefore not for the call either; this must not be overlooked. Discourse is
already presupposed in any expressing or 'proclaiming' ["Ausrufen"].
If the everyday interpretation knows a 'voice' of conscience, then one is
not so much thinking of an utterance (for this is something which factically one never cornes across); the 'voice' is taken rather as a giving-tounderstand. In the tendency to disclosure which belongs to the call, lies
the momentum ofa push-ofan abrupt arousaI. The call is from afar unto
afar. It reaches him who wants to be brought back.
But by this characterization of the conscience we have only traced the
phenomenal horizon for analysing ,its existential structure. We are not
316

l '.•. sich selbst, das sich überh6rt hat und überh6rt im Hinhoren auf das Man.' In this
passage, Heidegger has been exploiting three variations on the verb 'h6ren': 'hôren auf.• .'
(our 'listen to .. .'), 'überhôren' ('fail to hear'), and 'hinhôren' ('listen away'). The
verb 'überhôren' has two quite distinct uses. It may mean the 'hearing' which a teacher
does when pe 'hears' a pupil recite his lesson; but it may also mean to 'fail to hear', even
!o 'igp.ore' what one hears. This is the meaning which Heidegger seems to have uppermost
ln mlnd j but perhaps he is also suggesting that when one is lost in the "they", one 'hears'
one's own Self only in the manner of a perfunctory teacher who 'hears' a recitation without 'really lisrening to it'. In ordinary German the verb 'hinhôren' means hardly more
t~an ~o 'listen'; but Heidegger is emphasizing the prefix 'hin-', which suggests that one is
hstenlng to something other than oneself-listening away, in this case listening to the
"they". On other verbs ofhearing and listening, see Section 34 above, especially H. 163 ff.
2 'Dieses Hinhiiren muss gebrochen, das heisst es muss yom Dasein selbst die Môglichkeit eines Hôrens gegeben werden, das jenes unterbricht.'
8 ' ••• zum verlorenen Hôren ...' One might suspect that the 'lost hearing' is the hearing
which one closes' by 'failing to hear' j but Heidegger may mean rather the kind of hearing
one does when one is lost in the "they"-'überhôren' ofone's own Selfand 'Hinhôren' to
the 'they'.

II. 2
Being and Time
3 17
comparing this phenomenon with a call; we are understanding it
as a kind of discourse-in terms of the disclosedness that is constitutive
for Dasein. In considering this we have from the beginning avoided
the fust route which offers itself for an Interpretation of conscience
-that of tracing it back to sorne psychical faculty such as understanding, will, or feeling, or of explaining it as sorne sort of mixture of
these. When one is confronted with such a phenomenon as conscience,
one is str,uck by the ontologico-anthropological inadequacy ofa free-floating 27 2
framework of psychical faculties or personal actions all duly classified.V1

of Conscience as a Call
To any discourse there belongs that which is talked about in it. Discourse gives information about something, and does sa in sorne definite
regard. From what is thus talked about, it draws whatever it is saying as
this particular discourse-what is said in the talk as such. In discourse as
communication, this becomes accessible to the Dasein-with of Others,
for the most part by way of uttering it in language.
ln the call of conscience, what is it that is talked about-in other words,
to what is the appeal made? Manifestly Dasein itself. This answer is as
incontestable as it is indefinite. If the call has so vague a target, then it
might at most remain an occasion for Dasein to pay attention to itself.
But it is essential to Dasein that along with the disclosedness of its world
it has been disclosed to itself, so that it always understands itself. The call
reaches Dasein in this understanding of itself which it always has, and
which is concernful in an everyday, average manner. The call reaches
the they-self of concernful Being with Others.
And to what is one called when one is thus appealed tO?1 To one's
own Self. Not to what Dasein counts-fer, can do, or concerns itselfwith in
being with one another publicly, nor to what it has taken hold of, set
about, or let itself be carried along' with. The sort of Dasein which is
understood after the manner of the 'world both for Others and for itself,
gets passed over in this appeal; this is something of which the call to the
Self takes not the slightest cognizance. And because only the Self of the
they-self gets appealed to and brought to hear, the "they" collapses. But
the fact that the call passes over bath the "they" and the manner in which
Dasein has been publicly interpreted, does not by any means signify that
the "they" is not reached too. Precisely in passing over the "they" (keen as it
is for public repute) the call pushes it into insignificance [Bedeutungslosigkeit]. But the Self, which the appeal has robbed of this lodgement
and biding-place, gets brought to itself by the call.
~ 56. The Character

l'Und woraufhin wird es angerufen?'

273

274

318
Being and Time
II. 2
When the they-selfis appealed to, it gets called to the Self.1 But it does
not get called to that Selfwhich can become for itselfan 'object' on which
to pass judgment, nor to that Self which inertly dissects its 'inner life'
with fussy curiosity, nor to that Self which one has in mind when one
gazes 'analytically' at psychical conditions and what lies behind them.
The appeal to the Selfin the they-self does not force it inwards upon itself,
so that it can close itself offfrom the 'external world'. The calI passes over
everything like this and disperses it, so as to appeal solely to that Self
which, notwithstanding, is in no other way than Being-in-the-world.
But how are we to determine what is said in the talk that belongs to this
kind ofdiscourse? What does the conscience calI to him to whom it appeals ?
Taken strictly, nothing. The calI asserts nothing, gives no information
about world-events, has nothing to tell. Least of aIl does it try to set going
a 'soliloquy' in the Self to which it has appealed. 'Nothing' gets called to
[~u-gerufen] this Self, but it has been summoned [arifgerufin] to itself-that
is, to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. The tendency of the calI is not
such as to put up for 'trial' the Self to which the appeal is made; but it
calls Dasein forth (and 'forward') into its ownmost possibilities, as a
summons to its ownmost potentialiry-for-Being-its-Self. 2
The calI dispenses with any kind of utterance. It does not put itself
into words at aIl; yet it remains nothing less than obscure and indefinite.
Conscience. discourses sole{y and constant{y in the mode of keeping silent. In this
way it not only loses none of its perceptibility, but forces the Dasein which
has been appealed to and summoned, into the reticence of itself. The fact
that what is called in the calI has not been formulated in words, does not
give this phenomenon the indefiniteness of a mysterious voice, but merely
indicates that our understanding of what is 'called' is not to be tied up
with an expectation of anything like a communication.
Yet what the calI discloses is unequivocal, even though it may undergo
a different interpretation in the individual Dasein in accordance with its
own possibilities of understanding. While the content of the calI is seemingly indefinite, the direction it takes is a sure one and is not to be overlooked. The call does not require us to search gropingly for him to whom
it appeals, nor does it require any sign by which we can recognize that he
is or is not the one who is meant. When 'delusions' arise in the conscience,
they do so not because the calI has comInitted sorne oversight (has miscalled),3 but only because the calI gets heard in such a way that instead of
1 'Aufdas Selbst wird das Man-selbst angerufen.'

Z 'Der Ruf stellt, seiner Ruftendenz entsprechend, das angerufene Se1bst nicht zu einer
"Verhandlung", sondern aIs Aufrufzurn eigensten Se1bstseinkiinnen ist er ein Vor-(nach"vorne"-)Rufen des Daseins in seine eigensten Moglichkeiten.' The verbs 'anrufen',
'aufrufen', and 'vorrufen' can ail be used in the Iegai sense ofa 'surnrnons'.
3 ' .•• ein Sichversehen (Sichver-rufen) des Rufes •. .'

II. 2
Being and Time
319
becoIning authentically understood, it gets drawn by the they-self into a
soliloquy in whieh causes get pleaded, and it becomes perverted in its
tendency to disclose.
One must keep in mind that when we designate the conscience as a
"calI", this calI is an appeal to the they-self in its Self; as such an appeal,
it summons the Self to its potentiality-for-Being-its-Self, and thus caUs
Dasein forth to its possibilities.
But we shall not obtain an ontologically adequate Interpretation of the
conscience until it can be made plain not only who is called by the calI but
also who does the caUing, how the one to whom the appeal is made is related
to the one who calls, and how this 'relationship' must be taken ontologically as a way in which these are interconnected in their Being.

, 57. Conscience as the Call ofCare
Conscience summons Dasein's Self from its lostness in the "they". The
Self to which the appeal is made remains indefinite and empty in its
"what". When Dasein interprets itself in terms of that with which it
concerns itself, the calI passes over what Dasein, proximally and for the
most part, understands itself a s. And yet the Self has been reached,
unequivocallyand unmistakably. Not only is the calI meant for him to
whom the appeal is made 'without regard for persons', but even the caller
maintains itself in conspicuous indefiniteness. If the caller is asked about
its name, status, origin, or repute, it not only refuses to answer, but does
not even leave the slightest possibility of one's making it into something
with which one can be faIniliar when one's understanding of Dasein has a
'worldly' orientation. On the other hand, it by no means disguises itself
in the calI. That which calls the calI, simply holds itself aloof from any
way of becoming well-known, and this belongs to its phenomenal character. To let itself be drawn into getting considered and talked about,
goes against its kind of Being. 1 The peculiar indefiniteness of the caller
and the impossibility of making more definite what this caller is, are not
just nothing; they are distinctive for it in a positive way. They make known
to us that the caller is solely absorbed in summoning us to something, that
it is heard on{y as such, and furthermore that it will not let itself be coaxed.
But if so, is it not quite appropriate to the phenomenon to leave unasked
the question of what the caller is? Yes indeed, when it cornes to listening
to the factical calI of conscience in an existentiell way, but not when it
cornes to analysing existentially the facticity of the calling and the existentiality of the hearing.
1 'Es geht wider die Art seines Seins, sich in ein Betrachten und Bereden zichen zu
Iasscn.'

275

320

Being and Time
II. 2
But is it at aU necessary to keep raising explicitly the question of who
does the calling? Is this not answered for Dasein just as unequivocally as
the question of to whom the calI makes its appeal? In conscience Dasein caUs
itseif. This understanding of the caller may be more or less awake in the
factical hearing of the call. Ontologically, however, it is not enough to
answer that Dasein is at the same time both the caller and the one to whom
the appeal is made. When Dasein is appealed to, is it not 'there' in a
different way from that in which it does the calling? Shall we say that its
ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self functions as the caller?
Indeed the call is precisely something which we ourselves have neither
planned nor prepared for nor voluntarily performed, nor have we ever
done so. 'It' caUs,l against our expectations and even against our will.
On the other hand, the call undoubtedly does not come from someone
else who is with me in the world. The call cornes Jrom me and yet Jrom
beyond me. 2
These phenomenal findings are not to be explained away. After aIl,
they have been taken as a starting-point for explaining the voice of conscience as an alien power by which Dasein is dominated. If the interpretation continues in this direction, one supplies a possessor for the power
thus posited, 3 or one takes the power itself as a person who makes himself
known-namely God. On the other hand one may try to reject this
explanation in which the caller is taken as an alien manifestation of such
a power, and to explain away the conscience 'biologically' at the same
time. Both these explanations pass over the phenomenal findings too
hastily. Such procedures are facilitated by the unexpressed but ontologically dogmatic guiding thesis that what is (in other words, anything so
factual as the calI) must be present-at-hand, and that what does not let
itself be Objectively demonstrated as present-at-hand, just is not at all.
But methodologicaUy this is too precipitate. We must instead hold fast
not only to the phenomenal finding that 1 receive the caU as coming both
from me and from beyond me, but also to the implication that this
phenomenon is here delineated ontologically as a phenomenon of Dasein.
Only the existential constitution of this entity can afford us a clue for
Interpreting the kind of Being of the 'it' which does the calling.
Does our previous analysis of Dasein's state of Being show us a way of
making ontologieally intelligible the kind of Being which belongs to the
caller, and, along with it, that which belongs to the calling? The fact that
the call is not something which is explicitly performed by me, but that

Il. 2

Being and Time
321
rather 'it' does the calling, does not justify seeking the caller in sorne
entity with a character other than that of Dasein. Yet every Dasein
always exists factieally. It is not a free-floating self-projection; but its
character is determined by thrownness as a Fact of the entity which it is;
and, as so determined, it has in each case already been delivered over to
existence, and it constantly so remains. Dasein's facticity, however, is
essentially distinct from the factuality of something present-at-hand.
Existent Dasein does not encounter itself as something present-at-hand
within-the-world. But neither does thrownness adhere to Dasein as an
inaccessible characteristic which is of no importance for its existence.
As something thrown, Dasein has been thrown into existence. It exists as
an entity which has to be as it is and as it can be.
That it is factically, may be obscure and hidden as regards the "why"
ofit; but the "that-it-is' has itseifbeen disclosed to Dasein. 1 The thrownness of this entity belongs to the disclosedness of the 'there' and reveals
itself constantly in its current state-of-mind. This state-of-mind brings
Dasein, more or less explicitly and authentically, face to face with the
fact 'that it is, and that it has to be something with a potentiality-forBeing as the entity which it is'. 2 For the most part, however, its mood is
such that its thrownness gets closed off. In the face of its thrownness Dasein
flees to the relief which cornes with the supposed freedom of the they-self.
This fleeing has been described as a fleeing in the face of the uncanniness
which is basieally determinative for individualized Being-in-the-world.
Uncanniness reveals itself authentically in the basic state-of-mind of
anxiety; and, as the most elemental way in which thrown Dasein is
disclosed, it puts Dasein's Being-in-the-world face to face with the
"nothing" of the world; in the face of this "nothing", Dasein is anxious
with anxiety about its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. What ifthis Dasein,
whichfinds itself [sich befindet] in the very depths of its uncanniness, should be the
caller of the cali ofconscience?
Nothing speaks against this; but aIl those phenomena which we have
hitherto set forth in characterizing the caller and its calling speak
for it.
In its "who", the caller is definable in a 'worldly' way by nothing at aIl.
The caller is Dasein in its uncanniness: primordial, thrown Being-in-theworld as the "not-at-home"-the bare 'that-it-is' in the "nothing" of the 277
world. The caller is unfamiliar to the everyday they-self; it is something
Iike an alien voice. What could be more alien to the "they", lost in the

l ' "Es" ruft .. .' Here the pronoun 'es' is used quite impersonaUy, and does not
refer back to 'the caU' itself ('Der Ruf').
2 'Der Ruf kommt aus mir und doch über mieh.'
3 ' ••• unterlegt man der festgelegten Macht einen Besitzer .. .'

l 'Dass es faktisch ist, mag hinsiehtlich des Warum verborgen sein, das 'Dass' selbst
jedoch ist dem Dasein erschlossen.' (Cf. H. 135 above.)
Il 'Diese bringt das Dasein mehr oder minder ausdrücklich und eigentlieh vor sein
"dass es ist und ais das Seiende, das es ist, seinkonnend zu sein hat".'
L

322
Being and Time
II. 3
manifold 'world' ofits concern, than the Selfwhich has been individualized
down to itself in uncanniness and been thrown into the "nothing"? 'It'
calls, even though it gives the concernfully curious ear nothing to hear
which might be passed along in further retelling and talked about in
public. But what is Dasein even to report from the uncanniness of its
thrown Being? What else remains for it than its own potentiality-forBeing as revealed in anxiety? How else is "it" to call than by summoning
Dasein towards this potentiality-for-Being, which alone is the issue?
The call does not report events; it calls without uttering anything.
The call discourses in the uncanny mode of keeping siLent. And it does
this only because, in calling the one to whom the appeal is made, it does
not call him into the public idle talk of the "they", but caUs him back from
this into the reticence of his existent potentiality-for-Being. When the caller
reaches him to whom the appeal is made, it does so with a cold assurance
which is uncanny but by no means obvious. Wherein lies the basis for this
assurance if not in the fact that when Dasein has been individualized
down to itself in its uncanniness, it is for itself something that simply
cannot be mistaken for anything else? What is it that so radically deprives
Dasein of the possibility of misunderstanding itself by any sort of alibi
and failing to recognize itself, ifnot the forsakenness [Verlassenheit] with
which it has been abandoned [überlassenheit] to itself?
U ncanniness is the basic kind of Being-in-the-world, even though in an
everyday way it has been covered up. Out of the depths of this kind of
Being, Dasein itself, as conscience, calls. The 'it calls me' ["es ruft mich"]
is a distinctive kind of discourse for Dasein. The call whose mood has been
attuned by anxiety is what makes it possible first and foremost for Dasein
to project itself upon its ownmost potentiaLity-for-Being. The call of conscience, existentially understood, makes known for the first time what
we have hitherto merely contended :vil that uncanniness pursues Dasein
and is a threat to the lostness in which it has forgotten itself.
The proposition that Dasein is at the same time both the caller and the
one to whom the appeal is made, has now lost its empty formaI character
and its obviousness. Conscience manifests itself as the caU of care: the caller is
1
Dasein, which, in its thrownness (in its Being-already-in), is anxious
about its potentiality-for-Bt;ing. The one to whom the appeal is made is
this very same Dasein, summoned to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being
(ahead ofitself ...). Dasein is falling into the "they" (in Being-alreadyalongside the world ofits concern), and it is summoned out ofthis falling
278 by the appeal. The call of conscience-that is, conscience itself-has its
l ' ••• sich angstigend .. .' The aIder editions have 'sich angstend', which has virtually
the same meaning, and is more characteristic of Heidegger's style.

Il.2
Being and Time
32 3
ontological possibility in the fact that Dasein, III the very basis of its
Being, is care.
So we need not resort to powers with a character other than that of
Dasein; indeed, recourse to these is so far from clarifying the uncanniness
of the call that instead it annihilates it. In the end, does not the reason
why 'explanations' of the conscience have gone off the track, lie in the
fact that we have not looked Long enough to establish our phenomenal
findings as to the call, and that Dasein has been presupposed as having
some kind of ontological definiteness or indefiniteness, whichever it may
chance? Why should we look to alien powers for information before we
have made sure that in starting our analysis we have not given too Low an
assessment ofDasein's Being, regarding it as an innocuous subject endowed
with personal consciousness, somehow or other occurring?
And yet, if the caller-who is 'nobody', when seen after the manner of
the world-is interpreted as a power, this seems to be a dispassionate
recognition of something that one can 'come across Objectively'. When
seen correctly, however, this interpretation is only a fleeing in the face of
the conscience-a way for Dasein to escape by slinking away from that
thin wall by which the "they" is separated, as it were, from the uncanniness of its Being. This interpretation of the conscience passes itself off as
recognizing the calI in the sense of a voice which is 'universally' binding,
and which speaks in a way that is 'not just subjective'. Furthermore, the
'universal' conscience becomes exalted to a 'world-conscience', which
still has the phenomenal character of an 'it' and 'nobody', yet
which speaks-there in the individual 'subject'-as this indefinite something.
But this 'public conscience'-what else is it than the voice ofthe "they"?
A 'world-conscience' is a dubious fabrication, and Dasein can come to this
only because conscience, in its basis and its essence, is in each case mine-not
only in the sense that in each case the appeal is to one's ownmost potentiality-for-Being, but because the calI cornes from that entity which in
each case 1 myself am.
With this Interpretation of the caller, which is purely in accord with the
phenomenal character of the calling, the 'power' of conscience is not
diminished and rendered 'merely subjective'. On the contrary, only in
this way do the inexorability and unequivocal character of the calI
become free. This Interpretation does justice to the 'Objectivity' of the
appeal for the first time by leaving it its 'subjectivity', which of course
denies the they-self its dominion.
Nevertheless, this Interpretation of the conscience as the calI of care
will be countered by the question of whether any interpretation of the

279

280

32 4
Being and Time
II. 2
conscience can stand up if it removes itselfso far from 'natural experience'.
How is the conscience to function as that which summons us to our ownmost potentiality-for-Being, when proximally and for the most part it
merely warns and reproves? Does the conscience speak in so indefinite and
empty a manner about our potentiality-for-Being? Does it not rather
speak definitely and concretely in relation to failures and omissions which
have already befallen or which we still have before us? Does the alleged
appeal stem from a 'bad' conscience or from a 'good' one? Does the conscience give us anything positive at aIl? Does it not function rather in
just a critical fashion?
Such considerations are indisputably within their rights. We can,
however, demand that in any Interpretation of conscience 'one' should
recognize in it the phenomenon in question as it is experienced in an
everyday manner. But satisfying this requirement does not mean in turn
that the ordinary ontical way of understanding conscience must be recognized as the first court of appeal [erste Instanz] for an ontological Interpretation. On the other hand, the considerations which we have just
marshalled remain premature as long as the analysis of conscience to
which they pertain falls short of its goal. Hitherto we have merely
tried to trace back conscience as a phenomenon of Dasein to the ontological constitution of that entity. This has served to prepare us
for the task of making the conscience intelligible as an attestation of
Dasein's ownmost potentiality-Jor-Being-an attestation which lies in Dasein
itself.
But what the conscience attests becomes completely definite only when
we have delimited plainly enough the character of the hearing which
genuinely corresponds to the calling. The authentic understanding which
'follows' the call is not a mere addition which attaches itself to the
phenomenon of conscience by a process which may or may not be forthcoming. Only from an understanding of the appeal and together with
such an understanding does the full Experience of conscience let itself be
grasped. If in each case the caller and he to whom the appeal is made
are at the sarne time one's own Dasein themselves, then in any failure to hear
the call or any incorrect hearing of oneself, there lies a definite kind ofDasein's
Being. A free-floating call fro~ which 'nothing ensues' is an impossible
fiction when seen existentiaUy. With regard to Dasein, 'that nothing
ensues' signifies something positive.
So then, only by analysing the way the appeal is understood can one
be led to discuss explicitly what the call gives one ta understand. But only with
our foregoing general ontological characterization of the conscience does
it become possible to conceive existentially the conscience's call of

Il. 2

Being and Time
32 5
'Guilty!'l AIl experiences and interpretations of the conscience are at
one in that they make the 'voice' of conscience speak somehow of 'guilt'.
~ 58. Understanding the Appeal, and Cuilt

To grasp phenomenally what one hears in understanding the appeal,
we must go back to the appeal anew. The appeal to the they-self signifies
summoning one's ownmost Self to its potentiality-for-Being, and of course
as Dasein-that is, as concernful Being-in-the-world and Being with
Others. Thus in Interpreting existentially that towards which the call
summons us, we cannot seek to delimit any concrete single possibility of
existence as long as we correctly understand the methodological possibilities and tasks which such an Interpretation implies. That which can be
established, and which seeks to be established, is not what gets called in
and to each particular Dasein from an existentiell standpoint, but is
rather what belongs to the existential condition for the possibility of its facticalexistentiell potentiality-for-Being. lI
When the call is understood with an existentieU kind of hearing, such
understanding is more authentic the more non-relationally Dasein hears
and understands ils own Being-appealed-to, and the less the meaning of
the caU gets perverted by what one says or by what is fitting and accepted
[was sich gehôrt und gilt]. But what is it that is essentially implied when
the appeal is understood authenticaUy? What is it that has been essentially
given us to understand in the caU at any particular time, even if factically
it has not always been understood?
We have already answered this question, however, in our thesis that
the caU 'says' nothing which might be talked about, gives no information
about events. The calI points ftrward to Dasein's potentiality-for-Being,
and it does this as a call which comes from uncanniness. 3 The caller is,
to be sure, indefinite; but the "whence" from which it calls does not
remain a matter of indifference for the calling. This "whence"-the
uncanniness of thrown individualization-gets called too [mitgerufen] in
the calling; that is, it too gets disclosed [miterschlossen]. In calling forth
l ' ••• das 'ini Gewissen gerufene "schuldig" existenzial zu begreifen.' As Heidegger will
point out, the words 'schuldig', 'Schuld' and their derivatives have many different
meanings, corresponding not only to 'indebtedness', as we have seen on H. 242 above, but
also to 'guilt' and 'responsibility'. In the present chapter we shall translate them by
'guilty' and 'guilt' whenever possible, even though these expressions will not always be
entirely appropriate.
li 'Nicht das je existenziell im jeweiligen Dasein in dieses Gerufene kann und will
fixiert werden, sondem das, was zur existenzialen Bedingullg der M oglichkeit des je faktisch·
existenziellen Seinkônnens gehoTt.' In the older editions we find 'an dieses' rather than 'in
dieses', and 'zur' appears in spaced type.
s'Der Ruf weist das Dasein VOT aui sein Seinkônnen und das aIs Ruf aus der Unheimlichkeit.'

326
Being and Time
II. 2
to something, the "whence" of the calling is the "whither" to which we
are called back. When the call gives us a potentiality-for-Being to understand, it does not give us one which is ideal and universal; it disdoses it
as that which has been currently individualized and which belongs to
that particular Dasein. We have not fully determined .the character of t~e
call as disdosure until we understand it as one WhlCh calls us back m
calling us forth [aIs vorrufender Rückruf]. If we take the call this way
and orient ourselves by it, we must first ask what it gives us to understand.
But is not the question of what the caU says answered more easily and
surely if we 'simply' allude to what we generaUy ~ear or fail to hear ~n
any experience of conscience: namely, that the call elther addresses Dasem
as 'Guilty!', or, as in the case when the conscience gives warning, refers
to a possible 'Guilty!', or affirms, as a 'good' conscience, that one is
'conscious of no guilt'? Whatever the ways in which conscience is experienced or interpreted, all our experiences 'agree' on this 'Guilty!'. If only
it were not defined in such wholly different ways! And even if the meaning
ofthis 'Guilty!' should let itselfbe taken in a way upon which everyone
is agreed, the existential conuption of this Being-guilty would still :emain
obscure. Yet if Dasein addresses itself as 'Guilty!', whence could It draw
its idea of guilt except from the Interpretation of its own Being? AlI the
same, the question arises anew: who says how we are guilty and what "guilt"
signifies? On the other hand, the idea of guilt is not one which co~ld be
thought up arbitrarily and forced upon Dasein. If any understandmg of
the essence of guilt is possible at aU, then this possibility must have been
sketched out in Dasein beforehand. How are we to find the trail which
can lead to revealing this phenomenon? AU ontological investigations of
such phenomena as guilt, conscience, and death, must start with wh.at the
everyday interpretation of Dasein 'says' about them. Because Dasem has
falling as its kind of Being, the way Dasein gets interpreted is for the most
part inauthentically 'oriented' and does not reach the 'essence'; for. to
Dasein the primordially appropriate ontological way of formulatmg
questions remains alien. But whenever we see something wrongly, sorne
injunction as to the primordial 'idea' of the phenomenon is revealed
along with it. Where, however, shaU we get our criterion for the primordial
existential meaning of the 'Gl\ilty!'? From the fact that this 'Guilty!'
turns up as a predicate for the '1 am'. Is it possible that what is understood as 'guilt' in our inauthentic interpretation lies in Dasein's Being as
such, and that it does so in such a way that so far as any Dasein facticaUy
exists, it is also guilty?
Thus by invoking the 'Guilty!' which everyone agrees that he hears,
one has not yet answered the question of the existential meaning of what

II. 2

Being and Time
32 7
has been called in the caU. What has been called must first be conceptualized ifwe are to understand what the call of'Guilty!' means, and why
and how it becomes perverted in its signification by the everyday way of
interpreting it.
Everyday common sense first takes 'Being-guilty' in the sense of 'owing',
of'having something due on account'.l One is to give back to the Other
something to which the latter has a daim. This 'Being-guilty' as 'having
debts' ["Schulden haben"] is a way of Being with Others in the field of
concern, as in providing something or bringing it along. Other modes of
such concern are: depriving, borrowing, withholding, taking, stealingfailing to satisfy, in sorne way or other, the daims which Others have
made as to their possessions. This kind of Being-guilty is related to
that with which one can concem oneself.
"Being-guilty" also has the signification of 'being responsible for' ["schuld
sein an"]-that is, being the cause or author of something, or even 'being
the occasion' for something. In this sense of 'having responsibility' for
something, one can 'be guilty' of something without 'owing' anything to
someone else or coming to 'owe' him. On the other hand, one can owe
something to another without being responsible for it oneself. Another
person can 'incur debts' with Others 'for me'. 2
These ordinary significations of "Being-guilty" as 'having debts to
someone' and 'having responsibility for something' can go together and
define a kind of behaviour which we caU 'making oneselfresponsible'; that is,
by having the responsibility for having a debt, one may break a law and
make oneself punishable. 3 Yet the requirement which one fails to satisfy
need not necessarily be related to anyone's possessions; it can regulate
the very manner in which we are with one other publidy. 'Making oneself
responsible' by breaking a law, as we have thus defined it, can indeed also
have the character of 'coming to owe something to Others'. 4 This does not
happen merely through law-breaking as such, but rather through my
having the responsibility for the Other's becoming endangered in his
existence, led astray, or even ruined. This way ofcoming to owe something
l'Die alltagliche Verstandigkeit nimmt das "Schuldigsein" zunachst im Sinne von
"schulden", "bei einem etwas an Brett haben"" While this represents a very familiar
usage of the German 'Schuldigsein', it of course does not represent a 'common-sense' usage
of the English 'Being-guilty', which cornes from an entirely different stem.
l! 'lm Sinne dieses "Schuld habens" an etwas kann man "schuldig sein", ohne einem
Andern etwas zu "schulden" oder "schuldig" zu werden. Umgekehrt kann man einem
Andern etwas schulden, ohne selbst schuld daran zu sein. Ein Anderer kann bei Anderen
"fur mich" "Schulden machen"" On ' "schuldig" zu werden', Cf. our note l, p. 334,
H. 287 below.
3 ' ••• das wir nennen "sich schuldig machen", das heisst durch das Schuldhaben an einem
·Schuldenhaben ein Recht verletzen und sich strafbar machen.'
4 ' ••• eines "Schuldigwerdens an Anderen""

282

328
Being and Time
II. 2
to Others is possible without breaking the 'public' law. Thus the formaI
conception of"Being-guilty" in the sense ofhaving come to owe something
to an Other, may be defined as follows: "Being-the-basis for a lack ofsomething in the Dasein of an Other, and in such a manner that this very
Being-the-basis determines itself as 'lacking in some way' in terms of that
for which it is the basis."l This kind oflacking is a failure to satisfy some
requirement which applies to one's existent Being with Others.
We need not consider how such requirements arise and in what way
their character as requirements and laws must be conceived by reason of
their having such a source. In any case, "Being-guilry" in the sense last
mentioned, the breach of a 'moral requirement', is a kind of Being which
belongs to Dasein. Of course this holds good also for "Being-guilty" as
'making oneself punishable' and as 'having debts', and for any 'having
responsibility for . . .'. These too are ways in which Dasein behaves. If
one takes 'laden with moral guilt' as a 'quality' of Dasein, one has said
very little. On the contrary, this only makes it manifest that such a cha~­
acterization does not suffice for distinguishing ontologically between this
kind of 'attribute of Being' for Dasein and those other ways of behaving
which we have just listed. After all, the concept of moral guilt has been so
little clarified ontologically that when the idea of deserving punishment,
or even ofhaving debts to someone, has also been induded in this concept,
or when these ideas have been employed in the very defining of it, such
interpretations of this phenomenon could become prevalent and have
remained so. But therewith the 'Guilty!' gets thrust aside into the domain
of concem in the sense of reckoning up daims and balancing them off~
The phenomenon of guilt, which is not necessarily related to 'having
debts' and law-breaking, can be c1arified only ifwe first inquire in principle into Dasein's Being-guilty-in other words, if we conceive the idea
of'Guilty!' in terms of Dasein's kind of Being.
If this is our goal, the idea of 'Guilty!' must be sufficiently formalized so
that those ordinary phenomena of "guilt" which are related to our concernful' Being with Others, will drop out. The idea of guilt must not
only be raised above the domain of that concem in which we reckon
things up, but it must also be detached from relationship to any law or
"ought" such that by failing to ,comply with it one loads himself with
guilt. For here too "guilt" is still necessarily defined as a lack-when
something which ought to be and which can be is missing. 9 To be missing,

II.2
Being and Time
329
however, means not-Being-present-at-hand. A lack, as the not-Beingpresent-at-hand of something which ought to be, is a definite sort of Being
which goes with the present-at-hand. In this sense it is essential that in
existence there can be nothing lacking, not because it would then be
perfect, but because its character of Being remains distinct from any
presence-at-hand.
Nevertheless, in the idea of'Guilty!' there lies the character of the "not".
If the 'Guilty!' is something that can definitely apply to existence, then
this raises the ontological problem of darifying existentially the character
of this "not" as a "not". Moreover, to the idea of 'Guilty!' belongs what
is expressed without further differentiation in the conception of guilt as
'having responsibllity for'-that is, as Being-the basis for ..• Hence we
define the formally existential idea of the 'Guilty!' as "Being-the-basis
for a Being which has been defined by a 'not' "-that is to say, as "Beingthe-basis of a nulliry".l The idea of the "not" which lies in the concept of
guilt as understood existentially, excludes relatedness to anything presentat-hand which is possible or which may have been required; furthermore,
Dasein is altogether incommensurable with anything present-at-hand or
generally accepted [Geltenden] which is not it itself, or which is not in
the way Dasein is-namely, existing; so any possibility that, with regard to
Being-the-basis for a lack, the entity which is itself such a basis might be
reckoned up as 'lacking in some manner', is a possibility which drops out.
If a lack, such as failure to fulfi1 some requirement, has been 'caused' in
a manner characteristic of Dasein, we cannot simply reckon back to there
being something lacking [Mangelhaftigkeit] in the 'cause'. Being-the-basisfor-something need not have the same "not"-character as the privativum
which is based upon it and which arises from it. The basis need not
acquire a nullity of its own from that for which it is the basis [seinem
Begründeten]. This implies, however, that Being-guilry does not ./irst
result from an indebtedness [Verschuldung], but that, on the contrary, indebtedness
becomes possible only 'on the basis' of a primordial Being-guilry. Can something
like this be exhibited in Dasein's Being, and how is it at all possible
existentially?
Dasein's Being is care. It comprises in itself facticity (thrownness),
existence (projection), and falling. As being, Dasein is something that has
been thrown; it has been brought into its "there", but not ofits own accord.
As being, it has taken the definite form of a potentiality-for-Being which

l ' . • . Gntndsein für einen Mangel im Dasein eines Andem, so zwar, dass dieses Grundsein sel1lSt sich aus seinem Wofür ais "mangelhaft" bes~t.'
.
..
li ' ••• am ein Sollen und Gesetz, wogegen sich verfehlend Jeman~ Schuld am slch ladt.
Denn auch hier wird die Schuld notwendig noch ais Mangel bestunmt, ais Fehlen von
etwas, was sein solI und kann.'

l '. • • Grundsein für ein durch ein Nicht bestimmtes Sein-das heisst Gntndsein einer
Ni&htigkeit'. The noun 'Nichtigkeit' which might weIl be translated here as 'notness', may
he used in legal contexts where something has been declared 'null and void', and can he
used more generally to apply to almost anything that is vacuous, trifling, ephemeral, or
'nil'. Heidegger will rule out sorne of these connotations on H. 285.

284-

330
Being and Time
II. 2
has heard itse1f and has devoted itself to itself, but not as itse1f. lAs existent,
it never comes back behind its thrownness in such a way that it might
first re1ease this 'that-it-is-and-has-to-be' from its Being-its-Self and lead
it into the "there". Thrownness, however, does not lie behind it as some
event which has happened to Dasein, which has factually befallen and
fallen loose from Dasein again;2 on the contrary, as long as Dasein is,
Dasein, as care, is constantly its 'that-it-is'. To this entity it has been
de1ivered over, and as such it can exist sole1y as the entity which it is;
and as this entiry to which it has been thus de1ivered over, it is, in its
existing, the basis of its potentiality-for-Being. Although it has not laid
that basis itself, it reposes in the weight of it, which is made manifest to it
as a burden by Dasein's mood.
And how is Dasein this thrown basis? Only in that it projects ltse1f
upon possibilities into which it has been thrown. The Self, which as such
has to lay the basis for itself, can never get that basis into its power; and
yet, as existing, it must take over Being-a-basis. To be its own thrown
basis is that potentiality-for-Being which is the issue for care.
In being a basis-that is, in existing as thrown-Dasein constantly lags
behind its possibilities. It is never existent before its basis, but only jrom it
and as this basis. Thus "Being-a-basis" means never to have power over
one's ownmost Being from the ground up. This "not" belongs to the existential meaning of "thrownness". It itself, being a basis, is a nullity of
itse1f. 3 "Nullity" does not signify anything like not-Being-present-at-hand
or not-subsisting; what one has in view here is rather a "not" which is
constitutive for this Being of Dasein-its thrownness. The character of this
"not" as a "not" may be defined existentially: in being its Self, Dasein is,
as a Self, the entity that has been thrown. It has been released from its
basis, not through itse1f but to itself, so as to be as this basis. Dasein is not
itse1f the basis of its Being, inasmuch as this basis first arises from its own
projection; rather, as Being-its-Se1f, it is the Being ofits basis. 4 This basis
1 'Seiend ist es aIs Seinkonnen bestimmt, das sich selbst gehOrt und doch nicht aIs es
selbst sich zu eigen gegeben hat.' It is perhaps tempting to interpret 'gehort' as coming
from the verb 'gehoren' ('belong') rather than 'horen' ('hear'); we could then read
'belongs to itself'rather than 'has heard itself'. Our version, however, seems to be favoured
by the grammar of this passage.
Il 'Die Geworfenheit aber liegt nicht hinter ihm aIs ein tatsachlieh vorgefallenes und
yom Dasein wieder losgefallenes Ereignis, das mit ihm geschah .• '
8 'Es ist nie existent vor seinem Grunde, sondernje nur aus ihm und aLs dieser. Grundsein
besagt demnach, des eigensten Seins von Grund auf nie machtig sein. Dieses Nicht gehort
zum existenzialen Sinn der Geworfenheit. Grund-seiend ist es selbst eine Nichtigkeit
seiner selbst.' Presumably the 'not' to which Heidegger refers in this puzzling passage, is
implied in the 'never' of the preceding sentence.
4' ••• SeLbst seiend ist das Dasein das geworfene Seiende aIs Selbst. Nicht durch es selbst,
sondern an es selbst entLassen aus dem Grunde, um als dieser zu sein. Das Dasein ist nicht
insofern selbst der Grund seines Seins, aIs dieser aus eigenem Entwurf erst entspringt,
wohl aber ist es aIs Selbstsein das Sein des Grundes.'

II.2
Being and Time
331
is never anything but the basis for an entity whose Being has to take over
Being-a-basis.
Dasein is its basis existently-that is, in such a manner that it understands itself in terms of possibilities, and, as so understanding itself, is
that entity which has been thrown. But this implies that in having a
potentiality-for-Being it always stands in one possibility or another: it
constantly is not other possibilities, and it has waived these in its existentiell
projection. Not only is the projection, as one that has been thrown,
determined by the nullity of Being-a-basis; as projection it is itse1fessentially
null. This does not mean that it has the ontical property of 'inconsequentiality' or 'worthlessness'; what we have here is rather something existentially constitutive for the structure of the Being of projection. The nullity
we have in mind be10ngs to Dasein's Being-free for its existentiell possibilities. Freedom, however, is only in the choice of 0 n e possibilitythat is, in tolerating one's not having chosen the others and one's not
being able to choose them.
In the structure of thrownness, as in that of projection, there lies
essentially a nullity. This nullity is the basis for the possibility of inauthentic Dasein in its falling; and as falling, every inauthentic Dasein
factically is. Care itself, in its very essence, is permeated with nullity through and
through. Thus "care"-Dasein's Being-means, as thrown projection,
Being-the-basis of a nullity (and this Being-the-basis is itself null). This
means that Dasein as such is guilry, if our formally existential definition of
"guilt" as "Being-the-basis of a nullity" is indeed correct.
Existential nullity has by no means the character of a privation, where
something is lacking in comparisonwith an ideal which has been set up but
does not get attained in Dasein; rather, the Being of this entity is already
null as projection; and it is null in advance oj[vor] any of the things whieh it
can project and which it mostly attains. 1 This nullity, moreover, is thus
not something which emerges in Dasein occasionally, attaching itself to
it as an obscure quality which Dasein might e1iminate if it made sufficient
progress.
In spite of this, the ontological meaning of the notness [Nichtheit] of this
existential nullity is still obscure. But this holds also for the ontological
essence of the "not" in general. Ontology and logic, to be sure, have exacted
a great deal from the "not", and have thus made its possibilities visible
in a piecemeal fashion; but it itse1f has not been unveiled ontologically.
Ontology came across the "not" and made use of it. But is it so obvious
1 The negative character to which Heidegger here calIs attention is not brought out
as clearly by the word 'projection' (etymologically, 'throwing forward') as it is by the
German 'entwerfen' ('throwing off' or 'throwing away'), where the prefix 'ent-' indicates
separation.

286

332
Being and Time
II. 2
that every "not" signifies something negative in the sense of a lack? Is its
positivity exhausted by the fact that it constitutes 'passing over' something?
Why does aIl dialectic take refuge in negation, though it cannot provide
dialectical grounds for this sort of thing itself, or even just establish it as a
problem? Has anyone ever made a problem of the ontological source of
notness, or, prior to that, even sought the mere conditions on the basis of
which the problem of the "not" and its notness and the possibility of that
notness can be raised? And how else are these conditions to be found
except by taking the meaning of Being in general as a theme and clari.fying it?
The concepts of privation and lack-which, moreover, are not very
transparent-are already insufficient for the ontological Interpretation
of the phenomenon of guilt, though if we take them formally enough, we
can put them to considerable use. Least of aIl can we come any closer to
the existential phenomenon of guilt by taking our orientation from the
idea of evil, the malum as privatio boni. Just as the bonum and its privatio
have the same ontological origin in the ontology of the present-at-hand,
this ontologyalso applies to the idea of 'value', which has been 'abstracted'
from these.
Not only can entities whose Being is care load themselves with factical
guilt, but they are guilty in the very basis of their Being; and this Beingguilty is what provides, above aIl, the ontological condition for Dasein's
ability to come to owe anything in factically existing. This essential Beingguilty is, equiprimordially, the existential condition for the possibility of
the 'morally' good and for that of the 'morally' evil-that is, for morality
in general and for the possible forms which this may take factically. The
primordial "Being-guilty" cannot be defined by morality, since morality
already presupposes it for itself.
But what kind of experience speaks for this primordial Being-guilty
which belongs to Dasein? Nor may we forget the counter-question: 'is'
guilt 'there' only if a consciousness of guilt gets awakened, or does not the
primordial Being-guiltyl make itself known rather in the very fact that
guilt is 'asleep'? That this primordial Being-guilty remains proximally
and for the most part undisclosed, that it is kept closed off by Dasein's
falling Being, reveals only the aforesaid nullity. Being-guilty is more
primordial than any knowledge about it. And only because Dasein is
guilty in the basis of its Being, and closes itself off from itself as something
thrown and falling, is conscience possible, if indeed the calI gives us this
Being-guilty as something which at bottom we are to understand.
The calI is the calI of care. Being-guilty constitutes the Being to which
l 'Schuldigsein'. In the earlier editions the 'sein' is emphasized by having the type
spaced out.

II. 2

Being and Time
333
we give the name of "care". In uncanniness Dasein stands together with
itself primordially. Uncanniness brings this entity face to face with its
undisguised nUllity, which belongs to the possibility of its ownmost
potentiality-for-Being. To the extent that for Dasein, as care, its Being is
an issue, it summons itself as a "they" which is factically falling, and
summons itself from its uncanniness towards its potentiality-for-Being. 1
The appeal calls back by calling forth: B it calls Daseinforth to the possibility of taking over, in existing, even that thrown entity which it is; it
calls Dasein back to its thrownness so as to understand this thrownness as
the null basis which it has to take up into existence. This calling-back in
which conscience calls forth, gives Dasein to understand that Dasein
itself-the null basis for its null projection, standing in the possibility ofits
Being-is to bring itself back to itself from its lostness in the "they"; and
this means that it is guilty.
But in that case the sort of thing which Dasein gives itself to understand
would be information about itself. And the hearing which corresponds to
such a calI would be a taking cognizance of the Fact that one is 'guilty'. If,
however, the calI is to have the character of a summons, does not this way
of interpreting the conscience lead to a complete perversion of its function? Does not a "summons to Being-guilty" mean a summons to evil?
One would not want to impose upon the conscience such a meaning for
the "calI", even in the most violent of Interpretations. But if not, what
does it mean to 'summon one to Being-guilty'?
The meaning of the "call" becomes plain if, in our understanding ofit,
we stick to the existential sense of "Being-guilty", instead of making
basic the derivative conception of guilt in the sense of an indebtedness
which has 'arisen' through some deed done or left undone. Such a
demand is not arbitrary, if the call of conscience, coming from Dasein itself, is directed towards that entity alone. But if so, the "summons to
Being-guilty" signifies a calling-forth to that potentiality-for-Being which
in each case 1 as Dasein am already. Dasein need not first load a 'guilt'
upon itself through its failures or omissions; it must only be 'guilty'
authenticalry-'guilty' in the way in which it is. 8
Hearing the appeal correcdy is thus tantamount to having an understanding of oneself in one's ownmost potentiality-for-Being-that is, to
projecting oneself upon one's ownmost authentic potentiality for becoming
1 We follow the newer editions in reading: '... ruft es aus der Unheimlichkeit sich
selbst aIs faktisch-verfallendes Man auf zu seinem Seinkonnen.' This is apparently a
correction of the older version, where one finds 'Man selbst' instead of 'Man', and might
he tempted to construe this as a misprint for 'Man-se1bst' ('they-self').
Il 'Der Anruf ist vorrufender Rückruf.'
s '... es solI nur daa "schuldig"-als welches es ist-eigentlùh sein.'

28 7

288

334
Being and Time
II. 2
guilty.l When Dasein understandingly lets itself be called forth to this
possibility, this indudes its becoming free for the call-its readiness for the
potentiality of getting appealed to. In understanding the calI, Dasein is
in thrall to [hiirig] its ownmost possibility of existence. It has chosen itself.
In so choosing, Dasein makes possible its ownmost Being-guilty, which
remains dosed off from the they-self. The common sense of the "they"
knows only the satisfying of manipulable rules and public norms and the
failure to satisfy them. It reckons up infractions of them and tries to
balance them off. It has slunk away from its ownmost Being-guilty so as
to be able to talk more loudly about making "mistakes". But in the appeal,
the they-self gets called to [angerufen] the ownmost Being-guilty of the
Self. Understanding the calI is choosing; but it is not a choosing of conscience, which as such cannot be chosen. What is chosen is having-aconscience as Being-free for one's ownmost Being-guilty. "Understanding
the appeal" means "wanting to have a conscience".
This does not mean that one wants to have a 'good conscience', still
less that one cultivates the calI voluntarily; it means solely that one is
ready to be appealed to. Wanting to have a conscience isjust as far from
seeking out one's factical indebtednesses as it is from the tendency to
Liberation from guilt in the sense of the essential 'guilty'.
Wanting to have a conscience is rather the most primordial existentiell presupposition for the possibility of factically coming to owe something. In understanding the calI, Dasein lets its ownmost Self take action in itseif [in sich
handeln] in terms of that potentiality-for-Being which it has chosen. Only
so can it be answerable [verantwortlich]. Factically, however, any takingaction is necessarily 'conscienceless', not only because it may fail to avoid
sorne factical moral indebtedness, but because, on the null basis of its
null projection, it has, in Being with Others, already· become guilty
towards them. Thus one's wanting-to-have-a-conscience becomes the
taking-over of that essential consciencelessness within which alone the
existentiell possibility of being 'good' subsists.
Though the calI gives no information, it is not merely critical; it is
positive, in that it disdoses Dasein's most primordial potentiality-for-Being
as Being-guilty. Thus conscience manifests itself as an attestation which
belongs to Dasein's Being-an attestation in which conscience calls
Dasein itself face to face with its ownmost potentiality-foi-Being. Is there
an existentially more concrete way of determining the character of the
l 'Schuldigwerdenkonnen'. This 'ownrrwst authentic' sense of 'schuldig werden' is
presumably to be contrasted with the sense to which we have called attention in notes 2
and 4, p. 327, H, 282 above, and which we have expressed by the phrase 'come to owe'.
When it seems to us that Heidegger has the authentic sense in mind, we shall express it by
the phrase 'become guilty', though this device exaggerates a contrast which would not
be felt so sharply by the German reader,

Il. 2
Being and Time
335
authentic potentiality-for-Being which has thus been attested? But now
that we have exhibited a potentiality-for-Being which is attested in
Dasein itself, a preliminary question arises: can we daim sufficient
evidential weight for the way we have exhibited this, as long as the
embarrassment of our Interpreting the conscience in a one-sided manner
by tracing it back to Dasein's constitution while hastily passing over all
the familiar findings of the ordinary interpretation of conscience, is one
that is still undiminished? Is, then, the phenomenon of conscience, as it
'actually' is, still recognizable at all in the Interpretation we have given?
Have we not been all too sure ofourselves in the ingenuousness with which
we have deduced an idea of the conscience from Dasien's state of Being?
The final step of our Interpretation of the conscience is the existential
delimitation of the authentic potentiality-for-Being which conscience
attests. If we are to assure ourselves of a way of access which will make
such a step possible even for the ordinary unqerstanding of the conscience,
we must explicitly demonstrate the connection between the results of our
ontological analysis and the everyday ways in which the conscience is
experienced.
, 59. The Existential Interpretation of the Conscience, and the Way Conscience is
Ordinarily Interpreted1
Conscience is the calI of care from the uncanniness of Being-in-theworld-the calI which summons Dasein to its ownmost potentiality-forBeing-guilty. And corresponding to this calI, wanting-to-have-a-conscience
has emerged as the way in which the appeal is understood. These two
definitions cannot be brought inta harmony at once with the ordinary
interpretation of conscience. Indeed they seem to be in direct conflict with
it. We calI this interpretation of conscience the "ordinary" one [Vulgar]
because in characterizing this phenomenon and describing its 'function',
it sticks to what "they" know as the conscience, and how "they" follow it
or fail to follow it.
But must the ontological Interpretation agree with the ordinary interpretation at all? Should not the latter be, in principle, ontologically
suspect? If indeed Dasein understands itself proximal1y and for the most
part in terms of that with which it concerns itself, and if it interprets all
its ways of behaving as concern, then will not there be falling and concealment in its interpretation ofthat very way ofits Being which, as a calI,
seeks to bring it .back from its lostness in the concerns of the "they"?2
'Die ~xistenz;iale Interpretation des Gewissens und die vulgare Gewissensauslegung'.
2 " • , wird es dann nicht gerade die Weise seines Seins verfallend-verdeckend auslegen,

l

die es ais Rufaus derVeriorenheit in die Besorgnisse des Man zurUckholen will.' While we
Ceel that the meaning of this sentence is probably as we have represented it, the grammar
is quite ambiguous.

289

290

336
Being and Time
II.2
Everydayness takes Dasein as something ready-to-hand to be concerned
with-that is, something that gets managed and reckoned up. 'Life' is a
'business', whether or not it covers its costs.
And so with regard to the ordinary kind of Being ofDasein itself, there
is no guarantee that the way of interpreting conscience which springs
from it or the theories of conscience which are thus oriented, have arrived
at the right ontological horizon for its Interpretation. In spite of this, even
the ordinary experience ofconscience must somehow-pre-ontologicaUyreach this phenomenon. Two things foUow from this: on the one hand,
the everyday way of interpreting conscience cannot be accepted as the
final criterion for the 'Objectivity' ofan ontological analysis. On the other
hand, such an analysis has no right to disregard the everyday understanding ofconscience and to pass over the anthropological, psychological,
and theological theories of conscience which have been based upon it. If
existential analysis has laid bare the phenomenon of conscience in its
ontological roots, then precisely in terms of this analysis the ordinary
interpretations must become intelligible; and they must become intelligible not least in the ways in which they miss the phenomenon and in the
reasons why they conceal it. But since in the context of the problems of
this treatise the analysis of conscience is merely ancillary to what is
ontologically the fundamental question, we must be satisfied with aUuding
to the essential problems when we characterize the connection between
the existential Interpretation of conscience and the way it is ordinarily
interpreted.
In this ordinary interpretation there are four objections which might
be brought up against our Interpretation of conscience as the summons
of care to Being-guilty: (1) that the function of conscience is essentiaUy
critical; (2) that conscience always speaks in a way that is relative to some
definite deed which has been performed or willed; (3) that when the
'voice' is experienced, it is never so radicaUy related to Dasein's Being;
(4) that our Interpretation takes no account of the basic forms of the
phenomenon-'evil' conscience' and 'good', that which 'reproves' and
that which 'warns'.
Let us begin our discussion with the last of these considerations. In
aU interpretations of conscience, the 'evil' or 'bad' conscience gets the
priority: conscience is primarily 'evil'; such a conscience makes known to
us that in every experience of conscience something like a 'Guilty!' gets
experienced first. But in the idea of bad conscience, how is this makingknown of Being-evil understood? The 'Experience of conscience' turns up
after the deed has been done or left undone. The voice foUows the transgression and points back to that event which has befaUen and by which

II. 2
Being and Time
337
Dasein has loaded itself with guilt. If conscience makes known a 'Beingguilty', then it cannot do this by summoning us to something, but it does
so by remembering the guilt which has been incurred, and referring to it.
But does the 'fact' that the voice comes afterwards, prevent the caU
from being basicaUy a calling-forth? That the voice gets taken as a
stirring of conscience which follows after is not enough to prove that we
understand the phenomenon of conscience primordiaUy. What if factical
indebteqness were only the occasion for the factical calling of conscience?
What if that Interpretation of the 'evil' conscience which we have
described goes only half way? That such is the case is evident from the
ontological fore-having within whose scope the phenomenon has been
brought by this Interpretation. The voice is something that turns up;
it has its position in the sequence of Experiences which are present-athand, and it foUows after the Experience of the deed. But neither the caU,
nor the deed which has happened, nor the guilt with which one is laden,
is an occurrence with the character of something present-at-hand which
runs its course. The caU has the kind of Being which belongs to care. In
the caU Dasein ois' ahead of itself in such a way that at the same time it
directs itself back to its thrownness. Only by first positing that Dasein is
an interconnected sequence of successive Experiences, is it possible to take
the voice as something which comes afterwards, something later, which
therefore necessarily refers back. The voice does caU back, but it caUs
beyond the deed which has happened, and back to the Being-guilty into
which one has been thrown, which is 'earlier' than any indebtedness. But
at the same time, this calling-back caUs forth to Being-guilty, as something
to be seized upon in one's own existence, so that authentic existentieU
Being-guilty only 'foUows after' the caU, not vice versa. Bad conscience is
basicaUy so far fromjust reproving and pointing back that it rather points
forward 1 as it caUs one back into one's thrownness. The order of the sequence in
which Experiences run their course does notgive us the phenomenal structure of existing.
If we cannot reach the primordial phenomenon by a characterization
of 'bad' conscience, stilliess can we do so by a characterization of 'good'
conscience, whether we take this as a self-subsistent2 form of conscience
or as one which is essentiaUy founded upon 'bad' conscience. Just as
Dasein's 'Being-evil' would be made known to us in the 'bad' conscience,
the 'good' conscience must have made known its 'Being-good'. It is easy to see
that the conscience which used to be an 'effluence of the divine power' now
becomes a slave of Pharisaism. Such a conscience would let a man say of
l 'vorweisend', We have folIowed English idiom in translating 'vorweisen' as 'point
forward' and 'voITUfen' as 'calI forth'; but the prefix 'vor-' is the same in bath cases, and
means 'forward' as opposed to 'backward'.
2 'selbstiindige', See note l, p, 153, H. 117 and note l, p, 351, H, 30 3,

29 T

292

338
Being a1ld Time
II. 2
himself '1 am good'; who else can say this than the good man himself,
and who would be less willing to affirm it? But if this impossible conclusion is drawn from the idea of the good conscience, the fact that 'Beingguilty" is what the conscience caUs, only cornes to the fore.
To escape this conclusion, the "good' conscience has been Interpreted
as a privation of the 'bad' one, and defined as 'an Experienced lack ofbad
conscience'.vill This would make it an experience of not having the calI
turn up-that is, of my having nothing with which to reproach myself.
But how is such a 'lack' 'Experienced'? This supposed Experience is by no
means the experiencing of a calI; it is rather a making-certain 1 that a
deed attributed to Dasein has not been perpetrated by it and that Dasein
is therefore not guilty. Becoming certain that one has not done something,
has by no means the character of a conscience-phenomenon. It can, however, signify rather that one is forgetting one's conscience-in other words,
that one is emerging from the possibility ofbeing able to be appealed to.
ln the 'certainty' here mentioned lurks the tranquillizing suppression of
one's wanting to have a conscience-that is, of understanding one's
ownmost and constant Being-guilty. The 'good' conscience is neither a
self-subsistent form of conscience, nor a founded form of conscience; in
short, it is not a conscience-phenomenon at all.
ln so far as ta1k about a 'good' conscienée arises from everyday Dasein's
way of experiencing the conscience, everyday Dasein merely betrays
thereby that even when it speaks of the 'bad' conscience it basically fails
to reach the phenomenon. For the idea of the 'bad' conscience is oriented
factically by that of the 'good' conscience. The everyday interpretation
keeps within the dimension of concernfully reckoning up 'guilt' and
'innocence' ["Unschuld"] and balancing them off. This, then, is the
horizon within which the voice of conscience gets 'Experienced'.
ln characterizing what is primordial in the ideas of 'bad' and 'good'
conscience, we have also decided as to the distinction between a conscience
which points forward and warns and one which points back and reproves.
The idea of the warning conscience seems, of course, to come closest to
the phenomenon of the summons. It shares with this the character of
pointing forward. But ~his agreement is just an illusion. When we experience a warning conscience, the voice is regarded in turn as merely oriented
towards the deed which has been willed, from which it seeks to preserve
us. But the warning, as a check on what we have willed, is possible only
because the 'warning' calI is aimed at Dasein's potentiality-for-Beingthat is, at its understanding ofitselfin Being-gui1ty; not until we have such

n.2
Being and Time
339
understanding does 'what we have willed' get shattered. The conscience
which warns us has the function of regu1ating from moment to moment
our remaining free from indebtednesses. 1 ln the experience of a 'warning'
conscience the tendency of its calI is seen only to the extent that it remàins
accessible to the common sense of the "they".
The third consideration which we have mentioned invokes the fact that
the everyday experience of the conscience has no acquaintance with anything
like getting summoned to Being-guilty. This must be conceded. But does
this everyday experience thus give us any guarantee that the full possible
content of the calI of the voice of conscience has been heard therein?
Does it follow from this that theories of conscience which are based on the
ordinary way of experiencing it have made certain that their ontological
horizon for analysing this phenomenon is an appropriate one? Does not
falling, which is an essential kind of Being for Dasein, show us rather that
ontically this entity understands itself proximally and for the most part
in terms of the horizon of concern, but that ontologically, it defines
"Being" in the sense of presence-at-hand? This, however, leads to covering up the phenomenon in two ways: what one sees in this theory is a
sequence of Experiences or 'psychical processes'-a sequence whose kind
of Being is for the most part whoUy indefinite. In such experience the
conscience is encountered as an arbiter and admonisher, with whom
Dasein reckons and pleads its cause.
When Kant represented the conscience as a 'court ofjustice' and made
this the basic guiding idea in bis Interpretation of it, he did not do so by
accident; this was suggested by the idea of moral law-although his
conception of morality was far removed from utilitarianism and eudaemonism. Even the theory of value, whether it is regarded formally or
materially, has as its unexpressed ontological presupposition a 'metaphysic
ofmorals'-that is, an ontology of Dasein and existence. Dasein is regarded
as an entity with which one might concern oneself, whether this "concern"
has the sense of 'actualizing values' or of satisfying a norm.
If one is to invoke the full range of what the everyday experience of
conscience-as the only higher court for the Interpretation ofconscienceis acquainted with, this cannot be justified unless one has considered
beforehand whether the conscience can ever become authentically
accessible here at all.
Thus the further objection that the existential Interpretation over1ooks
the fact that the calI of conscience a1ways relates itself to sorne definite
deed which has been either 'actua1ized' or willed, a1so 10ses its force.

1 In this paragraph Heidegger takes pains to disassociate 'Gewissen' ('conscience') from
the adjective 'gewiss' ('certain') and its derivatives-'Sichvergewissem' ('makingcertain'), 'Gewisswerden' ('becoming certain'), and 'Gewissheit' ('certainty').

l 'Das wamende Gewissen hat die Funktion der momentweisen Regelung eines
Freibleibens von Verschuldungen.' The eariier editions contradict this by writing
' ... hat nicht die Funktion .• .'

293

294

340
Being and Time
Il. 2
It cannot be denied that the caU is often experienced as having such a
tendency. It remains questioIlilble only whether this experience of the
caU permits it to 'proclaim' itself fully. In the common-sense interpretation, one may suppose that one is sticking to the 'facts'; but in the end,
by its very common sense, this interpretation has restricted the caU's
disclosive range. As little as the 'good' conscience lets itself be put in the
service of a 'Pharisaism', just as little may the function of the 'bad' conscience be reduced to indicating indebtednesses which are present-at-hand
or thrusting aside those which are possible. This would be as if Dasein
were a 'household' whose indebtednesses simply need to be balanced off
in an orderly manner so that the Self may stand 'by' as a disinterested
spectator while these Experiences run their course.
If, however, that which is primary in the caU is not a relatedness to a
guilt which is facticaUy 'present-at-hand', or to some guilt-charged deed
which has been facticaUy wiUed, and if accordingly the 'reproving' and
'warning' types of conscience express no primordial caU-functions, then
we have also undermined the consideration we mentioned first, that the
existential Interpretation fails to recognize the 'essentiaUy' critical character of what the conscience does. This consideration too is one that
springs from catching sight of the phenomenon in a manner which,
within certain limits, is genuine; for in the content of the caU, one can
indeed point to nothing which the voice 'positively' recommends and
imposes. But how are we to understand this positivity which is missing in
what the conscience does? Does it foUow from this that conscience has a
'negative' character?
We miss a 'positive' content in that which is caUed, because we expect
to be told something current!J useful about assured possibilities of 'taking action'
which are available and calculable. This expectation has its basis within the
horizon of that way of interpreting which belongs to common-sense
concern-a way of interpreting which forces Dasein's existence to be
subsumed under the idea of a business procedure that can be regulated.
Such expectations (and in part these tacitly underlie even the demand
for a material ethic of value as contrasted with one that is 'merely' formaI)
are of course disappointed by the conscience. The cal1 of conscience fails
to give any such 'practical' injunctions, sole!J because it summons Dasein
to existence, to its ownmost potentiality-for-Being-its-Self. With the
maxims which one might be led to expect-maxims which could be
reckoned up unequivocaUy-the conscience would deny to existence
nothing less than the very possibility of taking action. But because the conscience manifestly cannot be 'positive' in this manner, neither does it
function 'just negatively' in this same manner. The caU discloses nothing

Il.2
Being and Time
34 1
which could be either positive or negative as something with which we
can concern ourselves; for what it has in view is a Being which is ontologicaUy
quite different-namely, existence. On the other hand, when the caU is
rightly understood, it gives us that which in the existential sense is the
'most positive' of all-namely, the ownmost possibility which Dasein
can present to itself, as a calling-back which caUs it forth into its factical
potentiality-for-being-its-Self at the time. To hear the caU authenticaUy,
signifies bringing oneself into a factical taking-action. But only by setting
forth the existential structure implied in our understanding of the appeal
when we hear it authentical!J, shaU we obtain a fully adequate Interpretation of what is caUed in the caU.
We must first show how the only phenomena with which the ordinary
interpretation has any familiarity point back to the primordial meaning
of the caU of conscience when they are understood in a way that is ontologically appropriate; we must then show that the ordinary interpretation
springs from the limitations of the way Dasein interprets itself in falling;
and, since falling belongs to care itself, we must also show that this
interpretation, in spite of all ils obviousness, is by no means accidentaI.
In criticizing the ordinary interpretation ofthe conscience ontologically, 295
one might be subject to the misunderstanding of supposing that if one
demonstrates that the everyday way of experiencing the conscience is not
existential!J primordial, one will have made some judgment as to the
existentiell 'moral quality' of any Dasein which maintains itself in that
kind of experience~Just as little as existence is necessarily and directly
impaired by an ontologicaUy inadequate way of understanding the
conscience, so little does an existentiaUy appropriate Interpretation of the
conscience guarantee that one has understood the caU in an existentieU
manner. It·is no less possible to be serious when one experiences the conscience in the ordinary way than not to be serious when one's understanding of it is more primordial. Nevertheless, the Interpretation which is
more primordial existentiaUy, also discloses possibilities for a more primordial existentieU understanding, as long as our ontological conceptualization does not let itself get eut off from our ontical experience.

, 60. The Existential Structure of the Authentic Potentiality-for-Being which is
Attested in the Conscience
The existential Interpretation of conscience is to exhibit an attestation
of Dasein's ownmost potentiality-for-Being-an attestation which is
[seiende] in Dasein itself. Conscience attests not by making something
known in an undifferentiated manner, but by calling forth and summoning us to Being-guilty. That which is so attested becomes 'grasped'

296

342
Being and Time
II.2
in the hearing which understands the calI undisguisedly in the sense it
has itselfintended. The understanding of the appeal is a mode ofDasein's
Being, and only as such does it give us the phenomenal content ofwhat the
calI of conscience attests. The authentic understanding of the calI has been
characterized as "wanting to have a conscience". This is a way ofletting
one's ownmost Self take action in itself of its own accord in its Beingguilty, and represents phenomenally that authentic potentiality-for-Being
which Dasein itself attests. The existential structure of this must now be
laid bare. Only so can we proceed to the basic constitution of the authenticiry of Dasein's existence as disclosed in Dasein itself.
Wanting to have a conscience is, as an understanding of oneself in
one's ownmost potentiality-for-Being, a way in which Dasein has been
disclosed. This disclosedness is constituted by discourse and state-of-mind,
as well as by understanding. To understand in an existentiell manner
implies projecting oneself in each case upon one's ownmost factical possibility of having the potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world. But the potentialiry-for-Being is understood only by existing in this possibility.
What kind of mood corresponds to such understanding? U nderstanding
the calI discloses one's own Dasein in the uncanniness of its individualization. The uncanniness which is revealed in understanding and revealed
along with it, becomes genuinely disclosed by the state-of-mind of anxiety
which belongs to that understanding. The fact of the anxiery of conscience,
gives us phenomenal confirmation that in understanding the calI Dasein
is brought face to face with its own uncanniness. Wanting-to-have-aconscience becomes a readiness for anxiety.
The third essential item in disclosedness is discourse. The calI itself is a
primordial kind of discourse for Dasein; but there is no corresponding
counter-discourse in which, let us say, one talks about what the conscience has said, and pleads one's cause. In hearing the calI understandingly, one denies oneself any counter-discourse, not because one has been
assailed by sorne 'obscure power', which suppresses one's hearing, but
because this hearing has appropriated the content of the calI unconcealedly. In the calI one's constant Being-guilty is represented, and in this
way the Self is brought back from the loud idle talk which goes with the
common sense of the "they". Thus the mode of Articulative discourse
which helongs to wanting to have a conscience, is one of reticence. Keeping
silent has been characterized as an essential possibility of discourse. 1x
Anyone who keeps silent when he wants to give us to understand sornething, must 'have something to say'. In the appeal Dasein gives itself to
understand its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. This calling is therefore a
keeping-silent. The discourse of the conscience never cornes to utterance.

Il. 2

Being and Time
343
Only in keeping silent does the conscience call; that is to say, the call
cornes from the soundlessness of uncanniness, and the Dasein which it
summons is called back into the stillness ofitself, and called back as something that is to become still. Only in reticence, therefore, is this silent
discourse understood appropriately in wanting to have a conscience. It
takes the words away from the common-sense idle talk of the "they".
The common-sense way of interpreting the conscience, which 'sticks
rigorously to the facts', takes the silent discourse of the conscience as an
occasion for passing it off as something which is not at all ascertainable
or present-at-hand. The fact that "they", who hear and understand
nothing but loud idle talk, cannot 'report' any calI, is held against the
conscience on the subterfuge that it is 'dumb' and manifestly not presentat-hand. With this kind of interpretation the "they" merely covers up its
own failure to hear the calI and the fact that its 'hearing' does not reach
very far.
The disclosedness of Dasein in wanting to have a conscience, is thus
constituted by anxiety as state-of-mind, by understanding as a projection
of oneselfupon one's ownmost Being-guilty, and by discourse as reticence.
This distinctive and authentic disclosedness, which is attested in Dasein
itself by its conscience-this reticent self-projection upon one's ownmost Beingguilry, in which one is readyfor anxiety-we calI "resoluteness".
Resoluteness is a distinctive mode of Dasein's disclosedness. 1 ln an
earlier passage, however, we have Interpreted disclosedness existentially
as the primordial truth,X Such truth is primarily not a quality of 'judgment'
nor ofany definite way ofbehaving, but something essentially constitutive
for Being-in-the-world as such. Truth must be conceived as a fundamental
existentiale. In our ontological clarification of the proposition that 'Dasein
is in the truth' we have called attention to the primordial disclosedness of
this entity as the truth of existence; and for the delimitation of its character
we have referred to the analysis of Dasein's authenticity.xt
ln resoluteness we have now arrived at that truth of Dasein which is
most primordial because it is authentic. Whenever a "there" is disclosed,
its whole Being-în-the-world-that is to say, the world, Being-in, and the
Selfwhich, as an '1 am', this entity is-is disclosed with equal primordiality. 2 Whenever the world is disclosed, entities within-the-world have
1 The etymological connection between 'Entschlossenheit' ('resoluteness') and 'Erschlossenheit' ('disclosedn~') is not to be, overI~ked.
..'
.
2 'Die Erschlossenhelt des Da erschhesst glelchursprunghch das Je ganze In-der-Weltsein das heisst die Welt, das In-Sein und das Selbst, das ais "ich bin" dieses Seiende ist.'
It i; not clear grammatically whether 'dieses Seiende' or the pronoun 'das' is the subject
of the final clause, or whether 'this entity' is 'Dasein' or 'Being-in'. The grammatical
function of the 'ais "ich bin" , is also doubtfuI. In support of our Interpretation, consult

H. 54, 1I4, 1I7, 2 6 7.

297

298

344
Bang and Time
II.2
been discovered already. The discoveredness of the ready-to-hand and the
present-at-hand is based on the disclosedness of the wodd xl1 for if the
current totality of involvements is to be freed, this requires that significanee be understood beforehand. In understandingsignificance, concernful
Dasein submits itself circumspectively to what it encounters as readyto-hand. Any discovering of a totality of involvements goes back to a
"for-the-sake-of-which"; and on the understandingofsuch a "for-the-sakeof-which" is based in turn the understanding of significance as the disclosedness of the current wodd. In seeking shelter, sustenance, livelihood, we
do so "for the sake of" constant possibilities ofDasein which are very close
to it;l upon these the entity for which its own Being is an issue, has already
projected itself. Thrown into its 'there', every Dasein has been factically
submitted to a definite 'wodd'-its 'wodd'. At the same time those factical projections which are closest to it, have been guided by its concernful
lostness in the "they". To this lostness, one's own Dasein can appeal, and
this appeal can be understood in the way of resoluteness. But in that case
this authentic disclosedness modifies with equal primordiality bath the way
in which the 'wodd' is discovered (and this is founded upon that disclosedness) and the way in which the Dasein-with of Others is disclosed.
The 'wodd' which is ready-to-hand does not become another one 'in its
content', nor does the circle of Others get exchanged for a new one; but
bath one's Being towards the ready-to-hand understandingly and concernfuIly, and one's solicitous Being with Others, are now given a
definite character in terms of their ownmost potentiality-for-Beingtheir-Selves.
Resoluteness, as authentic Bang-one's-Self, does not detach Dasein from
its wodd, nor does it isolate it so that it becomes a free-floating "1". And
how should it, when resoluteness as authentic disclosedness, is authentically
nothing else than Being-in-the-world? Resoluteness brings the Selfright into
its current concernful Being-alongside what is ready-to-hand, and pushes
it into solicitous Being with Others.
In the light of the "for-the-sake-of-which" of one's self-chosen potentiality-for-Being, resolute Dasein frees itself for its wodd. Dasein's resoluteness towards itselfis what first makes it possible to let the Others who are
with it 'be' in their ownmost potentiality-for-Being, and to co-disclose
this potentiality in the solicitude which leaps forth and liberates. When
Dasein is resolute, it can become the 'conscience' of Others. Only by
authentically Being-their-Selves in resoluteness can people authentically
be with one another-not by ambiguous and jealous stipulations and
l 'Das Umwillen des Unterkommens, des Unterhalts, des Fortkommens sind niichste
und stiindige Môgliehkeiten des Daseins ....

Il. 2

Bang and Time
345
talkative fraternizing in the "they" and in what "they" want to undertake.
Resoluteness, by its ontological essence, is always the resoluteness of
some factical Dasein at a particular time. The essence of Dasein as an
entity is its existence. Resoluteness 'exists' oolyas a resolution [Entschluss]
which understandingly projects itself. But on what basis does Dasein
disclose itselfin resoluteness? On what is it to resolve?l Only the resolution
itself can give the answer. One would completely misunderstand the
phenomenon of resoluteness if one should want to suppose that this consists simply in taking up possibilities which have been proposed and
recommended, and seizing hold of them. The resolution is precisely the disclosive projection and determination of what is factically possible at the time. To
resoluteness, the indefiniteness characteristic of every potentiality-for-Being
into which Dasein has been factically thrown, is something that necessarily belongs. Ooly in a resolution is resoluteness sure of itself. The existentiell indefiniteness of resoluteness never makes itself definite except in a
resolution; yet it has, aIl the same, its existential definiteness.
What one resolves upon in resoluteness has been prescribed ontologically
in the existentiality of Dasein in general as a potentiality-for-Being in the
manner of concernful solicitude. As care, however, Dasein has been
Determined by facticity and falling. Disclosed in its 'there', it maintains
itself both in truth and in untruth with equal primordiality.X111 This
'reaIly' holds in particular for resoluteness as authentic truth. Resoluteness
appropriates untruth authenticaIly. Dasein is already in irresoluteness
[Unentschlossenheit], and soon, perhaps, will be in it again. The term
"irresoluteness' merely expresses that phenomenon which we have Interpreted as a Being-surrendered to the way in which things have been
prevalently interpreted by the "they". Dasein, as a they-self, gets 'lived'
by the common-sense ambiguity of that publicness in which nobody
resolves upon anything but which has always made its decision. li "Resoluteness" signifies letting oneself be summoned out of one's lostness in the
"they". The irresoluteness of the "they" remains dominant notwithstanding, but it cannot impugn resolute existence. In the counterconcept to irresoluteness, as resoluteness as existentially understood,
we do not have in mind any ontico-psychical characteristic in the sense of
Being-burdened with inhibitions. Even resolutions remain dependent upon
l'Aber woraufhin erschliesst sich das Dasein in der Entschlossenheit? Wozu soli es
sich entschliessen?' (For similar constructions with 'woraufhin' etc. and 'erschliessen',
seeH. 141, 143, 145 above .)
....
. .
.
:1 'Das Dasein wird ais Man-se1bst von der verstandigen Zweldeuugkelt der Offenthchkeit "gelebt" in der sich niemand entschliesst, und die doch schon immer beschlossen
hat.' The e~ological connection between 'entschliesst' and 'beschlossen' is lost in our
translation.

299

30 0

346
Being and Time
II. 2
the "they" and itsworld. The understanding ofthis is one of the things that
a resolution disc1oses, inasmuch as resoluteness is what fust gives authentic
transparency to Dasein. In resoluteness the issue for Dasein is its ownmost
potentiality-for-Being, which, as something thrown, can project itself
only upon definite factical possibilities. Resolution does not withdraw
itselffrom 'actuality', but discovers first what is facticaUy possible; and it
does so py seizing upon it in whatever way is possible for it as its ownmost
potentiality-for-Being in the "they". The existential attributes of any
possible resolute Dasein inc1ude the items constitutive for an existential
phenomenon which we caU a "Situation" and which we have hitherto
passed over.
In the term "Situation" ("situation"-'to be in a situation') there is
an overtone of a signification that is spatial.l We shaU not try to eliminate
this from the existential conception for such an overtone is also implied
in the 'there' of Dasein. Being-in-the-world has a spatiality of its own,
characterized by the phenomena of de-severance and directionality.
Dasein 'makes room' in so far as it facticaUy exists. xiv But spatiality of the
kind which belongs to Dasein, and on the basis of which existence always
determines its 'location', is grounded in the state of Being-in-the-world,
for which disc10sedness is primarily constitutive. Just as the spatiality of
the "there" is grounded in disc1osedness, the Situation has its foundations
in resoluteness. The Situation is the "there" which is disc10sed in resoluteness-the "there" as whieh the existent entity is there. It is not a framework present-at-hand in which Dasein occurs, or into which it might even
just bring itself. Far removed from any present-at-hand mixture ofcircumstances and accidents which we encounter, the Situation is only through
resoluteness and in it. The current factieal involvement-character of the
circumstances disc10ses itself to the Self only when that involvementcharacter is such that one has resolved upon the "there" as which
that Self, in existing, has to be. 1I When what we caU "accidents"
befaU from the with-world and the environment, they can be-JaU only
resoluteness. 3
For the "they", however, the Situation is essentially something that has been
closed ojJ." The "they" knows only the 'general situation', loses itself in those
'opportunities' whieh are closest to it, and pays Dasein's way by a reckoning
, .1 ~e

Yerman. words 'Situation' and 'Lage' will be translated by 'Situation' and
sltuatlon respectlvely.
:& 'Entschlossen ftir das Da, ais welches das Selbst existierend zu sein hat erschliesst sich
ihm erst der jeweilige faktische Bewandtnischarakter der Umstande.'
'
3 :Nur d$r E~t-~chlossen~eit ka?,n d~ aus der Mit- und Umwelt zu-fallen, was wir
Zufalle nennen. Llterally a Zufall ('accident') is something that 'faIls to' something or
'
'befalls' it. (Compare the Latin 'accidens', which has basically the same meaning).
4. 'verschlossen'. Contrast 'erschlossen' ('disclosed') and 'entschlossen' ('resolved'),

II.2
Being and Time
347
up of 'accidents' which it fails to recognize, deems its own achievement,
and passes off as such. 1
Resoluteness brings the Being of the "there" into the existence of its
Situation. Indeed it delimits the existential structure of that authentic
potentiality-for-Being which the conscience attests-wanting to have a
conscience. In this potentiality we have recognized the appropriate way
of understanding the appeal. This makes it entirely plain that when the
caU of conscience summons us to our potentiality-for-Being, it does not
hold before us sorne empty ideal of existence, but caUs us forth into the
Situation. This existential positivity which the caU of conscience possesses
when rightly understood, gives us at the same time an insight: it makes
us see to what extent we fail to recognize the disc10sive character of the
conscience if the tendency of the caU is restricted to indebtednesses which
have already occurred or which we have before us; it also makes us see
to what extent the concrete understanding of the voice of conscience is
only seemingly transmitted to us if this restriction is made. When our
understanding of the appeal is Interpreted existentiaUy as resoluteness,
the conscience is revealed as that kind of Being-inc1uded in the very
basis of Daseinll-in which Dasein makes possible for itself its factical
existence, thus attesting its ownmost potentiality-for-Being.
This phenomenon which we have exhibited as "resoluteness' can hardly
be confused with an empty 'habitus' or an indefinite 'veUeity'. Resoluteness
does not fust take cognizance of a Situation and put that Situation before
itself; it has put itself into that Situation already. 3 As resolute, Dasein is
already taking action. The term 'take action'" is one which we are purposely
avoiding. For in the fust place this term must be taken so broadly that
"activity" [Aktivitat] will also embrace the passivity ofresistance. In the
second place, it suggests a misunderstanding in the ontology of Dasein, as
if resoluteness were a special way of behaviour belonging to the practical
faculty as contrasted with one that is theoretical. Care, however, as
l'Es kennt nur die "allgemeine Lage", verliert sich an die nacbsten "Gelegenheiten" und
bestreitet das Dasein aus der Verrechnung der "Zufàlle", die es, sie verkennend, ftir die
eigene Leistung haIt und ausgibt.' We have preserved the grammatical ambiguity of the
pronouns 'die' and 'es'.
:& ' • • • aIs die im Gronde des Daseins beschlossene Seinsart .•.' The participle 'beschlossene', which is etymologically akin to 'erschlossen',' etc., may mean. either 'includ~
or 'decided upon', as we have seen on H. 299. Very hkely both meanmgs are here mtended.
3 'Die Entschlossenheit stellt sich nicht erst, kenntnisnehmend, eine Situation vor,
sondern hat sich schon in sie gestellt.' Our rather literaI translation brings out the contrast
between 'sich stellen in .• .' ('put itself in .. .') and 'sich stellen •.. vor , , .' ('put before
itself .. ,'), but fails to bring out the important sense of the latter expression: 'to represent'
or 'to form an idea of'.
4. ' "Handeln" '. Far from avoiding this term, Heidegger has used it quite frequently.
But he is avoiding it as a possible substitute for the term 'Entschlossenheit'.

348
Being and Time
II. 2
concernful solicitude, so primordially and wholly envelops Dasein's Being
that it must already be presupposed as a whole when we distinguish
between theoretical and practical behaviour; it cannot first be built up
out of these !"aculties ~y a ~ialectic which, because it is existentially
3°1 ungro~~ded, ~s n~cessarl~y qUlte baseless. Resoluteness, however, is onfy that
~uthen~ry whzch, ln care, ts the object of care [in der Sorge gesorgte], and which
ts pOSSIble as care-the authenticiry of care itself.
To present the factical existentiell possibilities in their chief features
and interconnections, and to Interpret them according to their existential
structure, falls among the tasks of a thematic existential anthropology.xv
For the purposes of the present investigation as a study of fundamental
ontol~gy, it is enough if that authentic potentiality-for-Being which
conscience attests for Dasein itself in terms of Dasein itself is defined
existentially.
'
~ow. th~t res~lutene~ has. been worked out as Being-guilty, a self~roJection m which one IS reticent and ready for anxiety, 1 our investigation has be:n. put ~ a position for defining the ontological meaning of
that potentiality WhlCh we have been seeking-Dasein's authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. By now the authenticity of Dasein is neither an
empty term nor an idea which someone has fabricated. But even so as
an auth~tic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole, the authentic Being-towa:.dsdea.th whi.ch we hav~ deduced existentially still remains a purely existential ~roJect for which Dasein's attestation is missing. Ooly when such
attestation. bas be.en found will our investigation suffice to exhibit (as its
problematic requrres) an authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole existentially confirmed and clarified-a potentiality which belongs to Dasein.
For ooly when this entity has become phenomenally accessible in its
au~henticity an? its totality, will the question of the meaning of the
Bem~ of this ~tity, to whose existence there belongs in general an understandmg of Bemg, be based upon something which will stand any test.
s.~'Mit

c;:.

Heraufusarbeitung der Entsch10ssenheit ais des verschwiegenen angstbereiten
chen~ ens a du eigenste Schuldigsein .• .' The earlier editions have '
dem
vers Wlegenen, angstbereiten Sichentwerfen auf •••'
•. •
1

III
DASEIN'S AUTHENTIC POTENTIALITY-FOR-BEINGA-WHOLE, AND TEMPORALITY AS THE
ONTOLOGICAL MEANING OF CARE
, 61. A Preliminary Sketch of the Methodological Step from the Definition of

Dasein's Authentic Being-a-whole ta the Laying-bare of Temporaliry as a Phenomenon
AN authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole on the part of Dasein has
been projected existentially. By analysing this phenomenon, we have
revealed that authentic Being-towards-death is anticipation.! Dasein's
authentic potentiality-for-Being, in its existentiell attestation, has been
exhibited, and at the same time existentially Interpreted, as resoluteness. 1
How are these two phenomena of anticipation and resoluteness to be
brought together? Has not our ontological projection of the authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole led us into a dimension of Dasein which
lies far from the phenomenon of resoluteness? What can death and the
'concrete Situation' of taking action have in common? In attempting to
bring resoluteness and anticipation forcibly together, are we not seduced
into an intolerable and quite unphenomenological construction, for which
we can no longer claim that it has the character of an ontological projection, based upon the phenomena?
Any superficial binding together of the two phenomena is excluded.
There still remains one way out, and this is the ooly possible method:
namely, to take as our point of departure the phenomenon of resoluteness,
as attested in its existentiell possibility, and to ask: "Does resoluteness, in its
ownmost existentiell tendency of Being, point forward to anticipatory resoluteness
as its ownmost authentic possibility?" What if resoluteness, in accordance
with its own meaning, should bring itself into its authenticity ooly when
it projects itself not upon any random possibilities which just lie c!osest,
but upon that uttermost possibility which lies ahead of every factical
potentiality-for-Being of Dasein,1\ and, as such, enters more or less
l'In seiner existenziellen Bezeugung wurde das eigentliche Seinkonnen des Daseins ais
Entschlosstnhnt aufgezeigt und zugleich existenzial interpretiert.' In the earlier editions
the words 'aufgezeigt und zugleich existenzial interpretiert' are inserted between 'Bezeugun~' and 'wurde', not in their present position.
s •.. die allem faktischen Seinkonnen des Daseins vorgelagert ist •••' Cf. note l, p. 303,
H. 1159 above.

3°2

350
Being and Time
II. 3
undisguisedly into every potentiality-for-Being of which Dasein factically
takes hold? What if it is only in the anticipation of [zum] death that
resoluteness, as Dasein's authentic truth, has reached the authentic certainry
which belongs to it? What if it is only in the anticipation if death that all the
factical 'anticipatoriness' of resolving would be authentically understoodin other words, that it would be caught up with in an existentiell way?1
In our existential Interpretation, the entity which has been presented
to us as our theme has Dasein's kind of Being, and cannot be pieced together into something present-at-hand out of pieces which are present-athand. So long as we do not forget this, every step in our Interpretation
must be guided by the idea of existence. What this signifies for the question
of the possible connection between anticipation and resoluteness, is
nothing less than the demand that we should project these existential
303 phenomena upon the existentiell possibilities which have been delineated
in them, and 'think these possibilities through to the end' in an existential
manner. If we do this, the working-out of anticipatory resoluteness as a
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole such that this potentiality is authentic and
is possible in an existentiell way, will lose the character of an arbitrary
construction. It will have become a way of Interpreting whereby Dasein
is liberatedfor its uttermost possibility of existence.
In taking this step, the existential Interpretation makes known at the
same time its ownmost methodological character. Up till now, except for
sorne remarks which were occasionally necessary, we have deferred
explicit discussions of method. Our first task was to 'go forth' towards the
phenomena. But, bifore laying bare the meaning of the Being of an entity
which has been revealed in its basic phenomenal content, we must stop
for a while in the course of our investigation, not for the purpose of
'resting', but so that we may be impelled the more keenly.
Any genuine method is based on viewing in advance in an appropriate
way the basic constitution of the 'object' to be disc1osed, or of the domain
within which the objectlies. Thus any genuinely methodical considerationwhich is to be distinguished from empty discussions of technique-must
likewise give information about the kind of Being of the entity which has
been taken as our theme. The clarification of the methodological possibilities, requirements, and limitations of the existential analytic in
general, can alone secure the transparency which is necessary if we are to
. l 'W.enn im Vorlalifen zum Tode erst alle faktische "Vorliiujigkeit" des Entschliessens
elgenthch verstanden, das heisst existenziell eingeholt ware?' Our translation of 'Vorlaufen' as 'anticipation' again fails to bring out the metaphor of 'running ahead' with
WhlCh the no~0':l of 'catching up' is here clearly connected. (Cf. our note 3, p. 3~6, H.
262 above.) SllIl.tlarlY,our translation of'Vorlaufigkeit' as 'anticipatoriness', which brings
?ut ,the connectlOn wlth 'vorlaufen', is out of line with our usual translation of the adJective 'vorlaufig' as 'provisiona1'.

Il.3
Being and Time
351
take the basic step of unveiling the meaning of the Being of care. But the
Interpretation of the ontological meaning of care must be performed on the basis of
envisaging phenomenologically in a full and constant manner Dasein's existential
constitution as we have exhibited it up till noW.
Ontologically, Dasein is in principle different from everything that is
present-at-hand or Real. !ts 'subsistence' is not based on the substantiality of a substance but on the 'Self-subsistence' of the existing Self, whose
Being has been conceived as care. 1 The phenomenon of the Self-a
phenomenon which is inc1uded in care-needs to be defined existentially
in a way which is primordial and authentic, in contrast to our preparatory
exhibition of the inauthentic they-self. Along with this, we must establish
what possible ontological questions are to be directed towards the 'Self',
if indeed it is neither substance nor subject.
In this way, the phenomenon of care will be adequately c1arified for
the first time, and we shall then interrogate it as to its ontological meaning.
When this meaning has been determined, temporality will have been laid
bare. In exhibiting this, we are not led into out-of-the-way and sequestered 3°4domains of Dasein; we merely get a conception of the entire phenomenal
content of Dasein's basic existential constitution in the ultimate foundations of its own ontological intelligibility. Temporaliry gets experienced in.a
phenomenally primordial way in Dasein's authentic Being-a-whole, in the phenomenon of anticipatory resoluteness. If temporality makes itself known primordially in this, then we may suppose that the temporality of anticipatory
resoluteness is a distinctive mode oftemporality. Temporality has different
possibilities and different ways of temporali;:.ing itself. 2 The basic possibilities
l'Sein "Bestand" gründet nicht in der Substanzialitat einer Substanz, sondem in der
"Selbstiindigkeit" des existierenden Selbst, dessen Sein ais Sorge hegriffen wurde.'

In this sentence Heidegger has used no less than five words derived from the IndoEuropean base 'stli-' (Cf. English 'stand', Latin 'stare', German 'stehen'): 'Bestand',
'Substanz', 'Substantialiilit', 'Selbstandigkeit', 'existierenden'. In each case we have used
an English equivalent derived from t~e same base.
.
.
The it;nportant word 'Bestand', WhlCh we have, here translated somewhat arbltrarlly
as 'subsistence', and have often handled elsewhere In other ways, corresponds to the verb
'bestehen' ('to subsist', 'to remain', 'to consist m', even 'to exist' in a broader sense than
Heidegger's). It thus may stand for 'subsistence' in the broadest sense, or more particularly
for 'continued subsistence'; and it may also stand for that of which something 'consists'its 'content', the whole 'stock' of things of which it consists. This is the sense m whieh
Heidegger most frequently uses it, especially in such phrases as 'der phanomenale Bestand' ('the phenomenal content', 'the stock ofphenomena').
We have aIso somewhat arbitrarily translated 'Selbstandigkeit' as 'Self.subsistence', m
accordance with our translation of the adjective 'selbstandig' on H. 29I-!292. But as we
shall see later (H. 322), 'Self-constancy' would perhaps he more appropriate.
Il 'Zeitlichkeit kann sich in verschiedenen Moglichkeiten und m verschiedener Weise
uitigen.' In ordinary German the verb 'zeitigen' means 'to bring about' or more strictly,
'to brmg to maturity'; this is how we have translated it in the earlier portions of this work.
In the present section, however, and in those which follow, Heidegger is exploitmg the
etymological connection of 'zeitigen' with such words as 'Zeit' ('rime') and 'Zeitlichkeit'
('temporality'); we have accordingly ventured to translate it as 'to tempt>ralize.' We have

305

352
Being and Time
II. 3
of existence, the authenticity and inauthenticity of Dasein, are grounded
ontologically on possible temporalizations of temporality.
If the ascendancy of the falling understanding of Being (of Being as
presence-at-hand) 1 keeps Dasein far from the ontological character of
its own Being, it keeps it still farther from the primordial foundations of
that Being. So one must not be surprised if, at fust glance, temporality
does not correspond to that which is accessible to the ordinary understanding as 'time'. Thus neither the way time is conceived in our ordinary
experience of it, nor the problematic which arises from this experience,
can function without examination as a criterion for the appropriateness
of an Interpretation of time. Rather, we must, in our investigation, make
ourselves familiar beforehand with the primordial phenomenon of temporality, so that in terms of this we may cast light on the necessity, the source,
and the reason for the dominion of the way it is ordinarily understood.
The primordial phenomenon of temporality will be held secure by
demonstrating that ifwe have regard for the possible totality, unity, and
development of .those fundamental structures of Dasein which we have
hitherto exhibited, these structures are aU to be conceived as at bottom
'temporal' and as modes of the temporalizing of temporality. Thus, when
temporality has been laid bare, there arises for the existential analytic
the task of repeating our analysis of Dasein in the sense of Interpreting its
essential structures with regard to their temporality. The basic directions
of the analyses thus required are prescribed by temporality itself. Accordingly the chapter will be divided as foUows: anticipatory resoluteness as
the way in which Dasein's potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has existentieU
authenticity 2 (Section 62); the hermeneutical Situation at which we have
arrived for Interpreting the meaning of the Being ofcare, and the methodological character of the existential analytic in general (Section 63) ; care
and Selfhood (Section 64) ; temporality as the ontological meaning ofcare
(Section 65); Dasein's temporality and the tasks arising therefrom of
repeating the existential analysis in a primordial manner (Section 66).
~ 62. Anticipatory Resoluteness as the Way in which Dasein's Potentiality-JorBeing-a-whole has Existentiel! Authenticity
When resoluteness has been 'thought through to the end' in a way
corresponding to its ownmost tendency of Being, to what extent does it

already called attention to earlier passages (H. 122, 178) where 'zeitigen' has been
changed to 'zeigen' in the later editions.1f these changes are not simple misprints, they may
indicate a deliberate intention to avoid the use of this verb in any sense but the special
one here introduced. (Contrast H. 152, where no such correction has been made.)
l ' ••• (Sein ais Vorhandenheit) .. .' The 'aIs' of the later editions replaces an equalitysign which we find in the earlier editions.
li 'Das existenziell eigentliche Ganzseinkônnen· des Daseins als vorlaufende Entschlossenheit.'

II. 3
Being and Time
353
lead us to authentic Being-towards-death? How are we to conceive the
connection between wanting to have a conscience and Dasein's existentiaUy projected, authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole? Does welding
these two together yield a new phenomenon? Or are we left with the
resoluteness which is attested in its existentieU possibility, and can this
resoluteness undergo an existentiel! modali;:;ation through Being-towardsdeath? What does it mean 'to think through to the end' existentially the
phenomenon of resoluteness?
We have characterized resoluteness as a way of reticently projecting
oneselfupon one's ownmost Being-guilty, and exacting anxiety ofoneself.
Being-guilty belongs to Dasein's Being, and signifies the null Being-thebasis of a nullity. The 'Guilty!' which belongs to the Being of Dasein is
something that can be neither augmented nor diminished. It comes before
any quantification, if the latter has any meaning at aU. Moreover, Dasein
is essentiaUy guilty-not just guilty on some occasions, and on other occasions
not. Wanting-to-have-a-conscience resolves upon this Being-guilty. To
project oneself upon this Being-guilty, which Dasein is as long as it is,
belongs to the very meaning ofresoluteness. The existentieU way oftaking
over this 'guilt' in resoluteness, is therefore authentically accomplished
only when that resoluteness, in its disclosure of Dasein, has become so
transparent that Being-guilty is understood as something constant. But this
understanding is made possible only in so far as Dasein discloses to itself
its potentiality-for-Being, and discloses it 'right to its end'. ExistentiaUy,
however, Dasein's "Being-at-an-end" implies Being-towardr-the-end. As
Being-towardr-the-end which understandr-that is to say, as anticipation of
death-resoluteness becomes authenticaUy what it can be. Resoluteness
does not just 'have' a connection with anticipation, as with something
other than itself. lt harbours in itself authentic Being-towardr-death, as the
possible existentiel! inodality of its own authenticity. This 'connection' must be
elucidated phenomenaUy.
By "resoluteness" we mean "letting onself be called forth to one's
ownmost Being-guilty". Being-guilty belongs to the Being of Dasei~itself,
and we have determined that this is primarily a potentiality-for-Being.
To say that Dasein _ois' constantly guilty can only mean that in every case 3 06
Dasein maintàins itself in this Being and does so as either authentic or
inauthentic e~ting. Being-guilty is not just an abiding property of something constantly present-at-hand, but the existentiel! possibility of being
authenticaUy or inauthenticaUy guilty. In every case, the 'guilty' is only
in the current factical potentiality-for-Being. Thus because Being-guilty
belongs to the Being of Dasein, it must be conceived as a potentiality-forBeing-guilty. Resoluteness projects itself upon this potentiality-for-Being

354
Being and Time
II. 3
-that is to say, it understands itself in it. This understanding maintains
itself, therefore, in a primordial possibility of Dasein. It maintains itself
authenticaily in it if the resoluteness is primordiaIly that which it tends to be.
But we have revealed that Dasein's primordial Being towards its potentiality-for-Being is Being-towards-death-that is to say, towards that dis·
tinctive possibility of Dasein which we have already characterized.
Anticipation discloses this possibility as possibility. Thus only as anticipating
does resoluteness become a primordial Being towards Dasein's ownmost
potentiality-for-Being. Only when it 'qualifies' itself as Being-towardsdeath does resoluteness understand the 'can' of its potentiality-for-Being
guilty.l
When Dasein is resolute, it takes over authenticaIly in its existence the
fact that it is the nuIl basis of its own nullity. We have conceived death
existentiaIly as what we have characterized as the possibility of the impossibility of existence-that is to say, as the utter nullity of Dasein.
Death is not "added on" to Dasein at its 'end'; but Dasein, as care, is the
thrown (that is, nuIl) basis for its death. The nullity by which Dasein's
Being is dominated primordiaIly through and through, is revealed to
Dasein itself in authentic Being-towards-death. Only on the basis of
Dasein's whoie Being does anticipation make Being-guilty manifest. Care
harbours in itself both death and guilt equiprimordiaIly. Only anticipatory resoluteness understands the potentiality-for-Being-guilty authenticaily
and whoily-that is to say, primordiaily.i1
When the calI of conscience is understood, lostness in the "they" is
revealed. Resoluteness brings Dasein back to its ownmost potentialityfor-Being-its-Self. When one has an understanding Being-towards-death
-towards death as one's ownmost possibility-one's potentiality-for-Being
becomes authentic and whoIly transparent.
The calI of conscience passes over in its appeal aIl Dasein's 'worldly'
prestige and potentialities. Relendessly it individualizes Dasein down to
its potentiality-for-Being-guilty, and exacts of it that it should be this
potentiality authenticaIly. The unwavering precision with which Dasein
is thus essentiaIly individualized clown to its ownmost potentiality-forBeing, discloses the anticipation of [zum] death as the possibility which
is non-reiationai. Anticipatory resoluteness lets the potentiality-for-Beingguilty, as one's ownmost non-relational possibility, be struck whoIly into
the conscience.
Any factical Dasein has been determined by its ownmost Being-guilty
both before any factical indebtedness has been incurred and after any such
l 'Das "kann" des Schuldigseinkonnens versteht die Entschlossenheit erst, wenn sie
iich ais Sein zum Tode "qualifiziert".'

11·3
Being and Time
355
indebtedness has been paid off; and wanting-to-have-a-conscience
signifies that one is ready for the appeal to this ownmost Being-guilty.
This prior Being-guilty, which is constantly with us, does not show itself
unconcealedly in its character as prior until this very priority has been
enlisted in [hineingesteIlt] that possibility which is simply not to be outstripped. When, in anticipation, resoluteness has caught up [eingehoit] the
possibility of death into its potentiality-for-Being, Dasein's authentic
existence can no longer be outstripped [überholt] byanything.
The phenomenon of resoluteness has brought us before the primordial
lrUth of existence. As resolute, Dasein is revealed to itself in its current
factical potentiality-for-Being, and in such a way that Dasein itself is
this revealing and Being-revealed. To any truth, there belongs a corre·
sponding holding-for-true. The explicit appropriating of what has been
disclosed or discovered is Being-certain. The primordial truth of existence
demands an equiprimordial Being-certain, i~ which one maintains oneself
in what resoluteness discIoses. Itl gives itself the current factical Situation,
and brings itself into that Situation. The Situation cannot be calculated in
advance or presented like something present-at-hand which is waiting
for someone to grasp it. It merely gets disclosed in a free resolving which
has not been determined beforehand but is open to the possibility of such
determination. What, then, does the certainry which beiongs to such resoiuteness
signify? Such certainty must maintain itself in what is disclosed by the
resolution. But this means that it simply cannot become rigid as regards the
Situation, but must understand that the resolution, in accordance with its
own meaning as a disclosure, must be held open and free for the current
factical possibility. The certainty of the resolution signifies that one holds
oneselffree for the possibility of taking it back-a possibility which is facticaIly necessary. 2 However, such holding-for-true in resoluteness (as the
truth of existence) by no means lets us faIl back 'into irresoluteness. On the
contrary, this holding-for-true, as a resolute holding-oneself-free for taking
back, is authentic resoiuteness which resoives to keep repeating itselj. 3 Thus, in
1 Heidegger's ambiguous pronoun refers to 'resoluteness', as is clear from H. 326
below.
2 'Die Gewissheit des EntscWusses bedeutet: Sichjreihalten jür seine mogliche und je
faktisch notwendige Zurücknahme.' It is not grammatically clear whether the possessive
adjective 'seine' refers back to 'Entschlusses' ('resolution') or to the 'Sich-' of 'Sichfteihalten'
('oneself'). We have chosen the former interpretation as somewhat more natural. But it is
tempting to construe this and the following sentence as preparing the way for Heidegger's
remark a few lines below that 'In seinem Tod muss sich das Dasein schlechthin "zurücknehmen" '-which might be translated as 'In its death, Dasein must 'withdraw' itse1f
utterly.' In that case it would be attractive to translate the present sentence by writing
'••• holds oneseifjree for one's own withdrawal .• .'
8 '. • • eigentliche Entschlossenheit zur Wiederholung ihreT selbst.' The idea seems to be that
authentic resoluteness keeps reiterating itself in the face of a constant awareness that it
Illay have to be retracted or taken back at any time.

308

309

356
Being and Time
II. 3
an existentiell manner, one's very lostness in irresoluteness gets undermined. The holding-for-true which belongs to resoluteness, tends, in
accordance with its meaning, to hold itself free constantg-that is, to hold
itselffree for Dasein's whole potentiality-for-Being. This constant certainty
is guaranteed to resolut<::ness oIÙY so that it will relate itself to that possibility of which it can be utterly certain. In its death, Dasein must simply
'take back' everything. Since resoluteness is constantly certain of deathin other words, since it anticipates it-resoluteness thus attains a certainty
which is authentic and whole.
But Dasein is equiprimordially in the untruth. Anticipatory resoluteness
gives Dasein at the same time the primordial certainty that it has been
closed off. In anticipatory resoluteness, Dasein holds itself open for its
constant lostness in the irresoluteness of the "they"-a lostness which is
possible from the very basis of ifs own Being. As a constant possibility of
Dasein, irresoluteness is co-certain. When resoluteness is transparent to
itself, it understands that the inde.finiteness of one's potentiality-for-Being is
made definite oIÙY in a resolution as regards the current Situation. It
knows about the indefiniteness by which an entity that exists is dominated
through and through. But if this knowing is to correspond to authentic
resoluteness, it must itself arise from an authentic disclosure. The indefiniteness of one's own potentiality-for-Being, even when this potentiality
has become certain in a resolution, is fust made wholly manifest in Beingtowards-death. Anticipation brings Dasein face to face with a possibility
which is constantly certain but which at any moment remains indefinite
as to when that possibility will become an impossibility. Anticipation
makes it manifest that this entity has been thrown into the indefiniteness
of its 'limit-Situation'; when resolved upon the latter, Dasein gains its
authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. The indefiniteness of death is
primordially disclosed in anxiety. But this primordial anxiety strives to
exact resoluteness of itself. It moves out of the way everything which
conceals the fact that Dasein has been abandoned to itself. The "nothing"
with which anxiety brings us face to face, unveils the nullity by which
Dasein, in its very basis, is defined; and this basis itself i s as thrownness
into death.
Our analysis has revealed seriatim those items of modalization towards
which resoluteness tends of itself and which arise from authentic Being
towards death as that possibility which is one's ownmost, non-relational,
not to be outstripped, certain, and yet indefinite. Resoluteness is authentically and wholly what it can be, oIÙY as anticipatory resoluteness.
But on the other hand, in our Interpretation of the 'connection'
between resoluteness and anticipation, we have fust reached a full

II. 3
Being and Time
357
existential understanding ofanticipation itself. Hitherto this could amount
to no more than an ontological projection. We have now shown that
anticipation is not just a fictitious possibility which we have forced upon
Dasein; it is a mode of an existentiell potentiality-for-Being that is attested
in Dasein-a mode which Dasein exacts of itself, if indeed it authentically
understands itself as resolute. Anticipation 'is' not sorne kind of freefloating behaviour, but must be conceived as the possibility of the authenticity
of that ~esoluteness which kas been attested in an existentiell way-a possibility
hidden in such resoluteness, and thus attested therewith. Authentic 'thinking about
death' is a wanting-to-have-a-conscience, which has become transparent
to itself in an existentiell manner. If resoluteness, as authentic, tends towards the mode delimited by anticipation, and if anticipation goes to
make up Dasein's authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole, then in the
resoluteness which is attested in an existentiell manner, there is attested
with it an authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole which belongs to
Dasein. The question of the potentiality-for-Being-a-whole is one which is factical
and existentiell. It is answered by Dasein as resolute. The question of Dasein's
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has now fully sloughed off the character
indicated at the beginning,iU when we treated it as it if were just a theoretical or methodological question of the anâlytic of Dasein, arising from
the endeavour to have the whole of Dasein completely 'given'. The question of Dasein's totality, which at the beginning we discussed only with
regard to ontological method, has its justification, but only because the
ground for that justification goes back to an ontical possibility of Dasein.
By thus casting light upon the 'connection' between anticipation and
resoluteness in the sense of the possible modalization of the latter by the
former, we have exhibited as a phenomenon an authentic potentialityfor-Being-a-whole which belongs to Dasein. If with this phenomenon we
have reached a way of Being of Dasein in which it brings itself to itself
and face to face with itself, then this phenomenon must, both ontically
and ontologically, remain unintelligible to the everyday common-sense
manner in which Dasein has been interpreted by the "they". It would be
a misunderstanding to shove this existentiell possibility aside as 'unproved' or to want to 'prove' it theoreticaUy. Yet the phenomenon needs
to be protected against the grossest perversions.
Anticipatory resoluteness is not a way of escape, fabricated for the
'overcoming' of death; it is rather that understanding which follows the
caU of conscience and which frees for death the possibility of acquiring
power over Dasein's existence and of basicaUy dispersing all fugitive Selfconcealments. Nor does wanting-to-have-a-conscience, which has been
made determinate as Being-towards-death, signify a kind of seclusion in

310

358
Being and Time
II. 3
which one Bees the world; rather, it brings one without Illusions into the
resoluteness of 'taking action'. Neither does anticipatory resoluteness stem
from 'idealistic' exactions soaring above existence and its possibilities; it
springs from a sober understanding of what are facticaIly the basic possibilities for Dasein. Along with the sober anxiety which brings us face to
face with our individualized potentiality-for-Being, there goes an unshakable joy in this possibility. In it Dasein becomes free from the entertaining 'incidentals' with which busy curiosity keeps providing itselfprimarily from the events of the world,l But the analysis of these basic
moods would transgress the limits which we have drawn for the present
Interpretation by aiming towards fundamental ontology.
Is there not, however, a definite ontical way of taking authentic
existence, a factical ideal of Dasein, underlying our ontological Interpretation of Dasein's existence? That is so indeed. But not only is this Fact
one which must not be denied and which we are forced to grant; it must
also be conceived in its positive necessiry, in terms of the object which we
have taken as the theme of our investigation. Philosophy will never seek
to deny its 'presuppositions', but neither may it simply admit them. It
conceives them, and it unfolds with more and more penetration both the
presuppositions themselves and that for which they are presuppositions.
The methodological considerations now demanded of us will have this
very function.

3 11

~ 63. The Hermeneutical Situation at which we have Arrived for Interpreting the
Meaning of the Being ofCarej and the Methodological Character of the Existential
Anarytic in General'
In its anticipatory resoluteness, Dasein has now been made phenomenaIly visible with regard to its possible authenticity and totality. The
hermeneutical Situationiv which was previously inadequate for interpreting the meaning of the Being of care, now has the required primordiality.
Dasein has been put into that which we have in advance, and this has
been done primordiaIly-that is to say, this has been done with regard to
its authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole; the idea of existence, which
guides us as that which we see in advance, has been made definite by the
clarification of our ownmost potentiality-for-Being; and, now that we
have concretely worked out the structure of Dasein's Being, its peculiar
ontological character has become so plain as compared with everything
present-at-hand, that Dasein's existentiality has been grasped in advance

l'In ihr wird das Dasein frei von den "Zufalligkeiten" des Unterhaltenwerdens die
sich die geschiiftige Neugier primar aus den Weltbegebenheiten verschafft.'
2 'Die jür eine Interpretation des Seinssinnes der Sarge gewonnene hermeneutische Situation und
der methodische Charakter der existenz:ialen Ana{ytik üherhaupt.·

Il. 3
Being and Time
359
with sufficient Articulation to give sure guidance for working out the
existentialia conceptuaIly.
The way which we have so far pursued in the analytic of Dasein has
led us to a concrete demonstration of the thesisv which was put forward
just casually at the beginning-that the entiry which in every case we ourse/ves
are, is ontologicalry that which is farthest. The reason for this lies in care itself.
Our Being alongside the things with which we concern ourselves most
closely in the 'world'-a Being which is falling-guides the everyday way
in which Dasein is interpreted, and covers up ontically Dasein's authentic
Being, so that the ontology which is directed towards this entity is denied
an appropriate basis. Therefore the primordial way in which this entity
is presented as a phenomenon is anything but obvious, if even ontology
proximally foIlows the course of the everyday interpretation of Dasein.
The laying-bare of Dasein's primordial Being must rather be wrested
from Dasein by following the opposite course from that taken by the falling
ontico-ontological tendency of interpretation.
Not only in exhibiting the most elemental structures of Being-in-theworld, in delimiting the concept of the world, in clarifying the average
"who" of this entity (the "who" which is closest to us-the they-self), in
Interpreting the 'there', but also, above aIl, in analysing care, death,
conscience, and guilt-in aIl these ways we have shown how in Dasein
itself concernful common sense has taken control of Dasein's potentialityfor-Being and the disclosure ofthat potentiality-that is to say, the closing
of it off.
Dasein's kind of Being thus demands that any ontological Interpretation
which sets itself the goal of exhibiting the phenomena in their primordiality, should capture the Being of this entiry, in spite of this entiry's own tendency to
cover things up. Existential analysis, therefore, constantly has the character
of doing violence [Gewaltsamkeit], whether to the claims of the everyday
interpretation, or to its complacency and its tranquillized obviousness.
While indeed this characteristic is speciaIly distinctive of the ontology of
Dasein, it belongs properly to any Interpretation, because the understanding which develops in Interpretation has the structure ofa projection.
But is not anything of this sort guided and regulated in a way of its own?
Where are ontologicalprojects to get the evidence that their 'findings'
are phenomenaIly appropriate? Ontological Interpretation projects the
entity presented to it upon the Being which is that entity's own, so as to
conceptualize it with regard to its structure. Where are the signposts to
direct the projection, so that Being will be reached at aIl? And what it
the entity which becomes the theme of the existential analytic, hides the
Being that belongs to it, and does so in its very way ofbeing? To answer

3 12

360
Being and Time
II. 3
these questions we must first restrict ourselves to clarifying the analytic of
Dasein, as the questions themselves demand.
The interpretation of the Selfbelongs to Dasein's Being. In the circumspective-concernful discovering of the 'world', concern gets sighted too.
Dasein always understands itself factically in definite existentiell possibilities, even if its projects stem only from the common sense of the "they".
Whether explicitly or not, whether appropriately or not, existence is
somehow understood too. There are sorne things which every ontical
understanding 'includes', even ifthese are only pre-ontological-that is to
say, not conceived theoretically or thematicaIly. Every ontologically
explicit question about Dasein's Being has had the way already prepared
for it by the kind of Being which Dasein has.
Yet where are we to find out what makes up the 'authentic' existence
of Dasein? Unless we have an existentiell understanding, aIl analysis of
existentiality will remain groundless. Is it not the case that underlying our
Interpretation of the authenticity and totality of Dasein, there is an
ontical way of taking existence which may be possible but need not be
binding for everyone? Existential Interpretation will never seek to take
over any authoritarian pronouncement as to those things which, from an
existentiell point of view, are possible or binding. But must it not justify
itself in regard to those existentiell possibilities with which it gives ontological Interpretation its ontical basis? If the Being of Dasein is essentially
potentiality-for-Being, if it is Being-free for its ownmost possibilities, and
if, in every case, it exists only in freedom for these possibilities or in lack
offreedom for them, can ontological Interpretation do anything else than
base itself on ontical possibilities-ways of potentiality-for-Being-and
project these possibilities upon their ontological possibility? An9- if, for the
most part, Dasein interprets itself in terms of its lostness in concerning
itself with the 'world', does not the appropriate way of disclosure for such
an entity lie in determining the ontico-existentiell possibilities (and doing
so in the manner which we have achieved by following the opposite
course) and then providing an existential analysis grounded upon these
possibilities? In that case, will not the violence of this projection amount to freeing
Dasein's undisguised phenomenal content?
It may be that our method demands this 'violent' presentation of
possibilities of existence, but can such a presentation be taken out of the
province of our free discretion? If the analyic makes anticipatory resoluteness basic as a potentiality-for-Being which, in an existentiell manner, is
authentic-a possibility to which Dasein itself summons us from the very
basis of its existence-then is this possibility just one which is lift to our
discretion? Ras that way-of-Being in accordance with which Dasein's

II. 3

Being and Time
361
potentiality-for-Being cornports itself towards its distinctive possibilitydeath-been just accidentally pounced upon? Does Being-in-the-world
have a higher instance for ils potentiality-Jor-Being than ils own deathl 1
Even if the ontico-ontological projection of Dasein upon an authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole may not be just something that is left to
our discretion, does this already justify the existential Interpretation we
have given for this phenomenon? Where does this Interpretation get its
clue, if not from an idea of existence in general which has been 'presupposed'? Row have the steps in the analysis of inauthentic everydayness
been regulated, if not by the concept of existence which we have posited?
And if we say that Dasein 'faIls', and that therefore the authenticity of its
potentiality-for-Being must be wrested from Dasein in spite of this tendencyofits Being,2 fromwhat point ofviewis this spoken? Is not everything
already illumined by the light of the 'presupposed' idea of existence, even
ifrather dimly? Where does this idea get itsjustification? Has our initial
projection, in which we called attention to it, led us nowhere? By no
means.
In indicating the formaI aspects of the idea of existence we have been
guided by the understanding-of-Being which lies in Dasein itself. Without
any ontological transparency, it has nevertheless been revealed that in
every case 1 am myself the entity which we calI Dasein, and that 1 am so
as a potentiality-for-Being for which to be this entity is an issue. Dasein
understands itself as Being-in-the-world, even if it does so without
adequate ontological definiteness. Being thus, it encounters entities which
have the kind of Being ofwhat is ready-to-hand and present-at-hand. No
matter how far removed from an ontological concept the distinction
between existence and Reality may be, no matter even if Dasein proximally understands existence as Reality, Dasein is not just present-at-hand
but has already understood itselJ, however mythical or magical the interpretation which it gives may be. For otherwise, Dasein would never 'live'
in a myth and would not be concerned with magic in ritual and cult.
The idea of existence which we have posited gives us an outline of the
formaI structure of the understanding of Dasein and does so in a way
which is not binding from an existentiell point ofview.
Under the guidanceofthis idea thepreparatoryanalysisoftheeverydayness that lies closest to us has been carried out as far as the first conceptual
l

'Hat das In-der-Welt-sein eine Mhere Instanz seines Sein1ciinnens als seinen Tod?'

Il ' ••• und deshalb sei ibm die Eigentlichkeit des Sei':lkonnens ~c:ge~ diese Seinstendenz

abzuringen ...' This of course does not mean th~t. thiS authentlclty 18 to b~ ~ken away
from Dasein' it means that because such authentlClty runs counter to Dasem s tendency
to faH, Dasein must make a very rea~ e~ort to ac~i~ve. it, or perhaps ra!her that our
Interpretation caUs for a similar effort lf th18 authentlclty lS to be properly discemed.

3 1 4-

Being and Time
II. 3
definition of "care". This latter phenomenon has enabled us to get a more
precise grasp of existence and of its relations to facticity and falling.
And defining the structure of care has given us a basis on which to distinguish ontologically between existence and Reality for the first time. vi
This has led us to the thesis that the substance of man is existence. vii
Yet even in this formaI idea of existence, which is not binding upon us
in an existentiell way, there already lurks a definite though unpretentious
ontological 'content', which-like the idea of Reality, which has been
distinguished from this-'presupposes' an idea of Being in general. Only
within the horizon of this idea of Being can the distinction between existence and Reality be accomplished. Surely, in both of them what we have
in view is Being.
But if we are to obtain an ontologically clarified idea of Being in
general, must we not do so by first working out that understanding-ofBeing which belongs to Dasein? This understanding, however, is to be
grasped primordially only on the basis of a primordial Interpretation of
Dasein, in which we take the idea of existence as our clue. Does it not
then become altogether patent in the end that this problem offundamental
ontology which we have broached, is one which moves in a 'circle'?
We have indeed already shown, in analysing the structure of understanding in general, that what gets censured inappropriately as a 'circle',
belongs to the essence and to the distinctive character of understanding
as such. viU In spite of this, if the problematic of fundamental ontology is
to have its hermeneutical Situation clarified, our investigation must now
come back explicitly to this 'circular argument'. When it is objected that
the existential Interpretation is 'circular', it is said that we have 'presupposed' the idea of existence and of Being in general, and that Dasein
gets Interpreted 'accordingly', so that the idea of Being may be obtained
from it. But what does 'presupposition' signify? In positing the idea of
existence, do we also posit some proposition from which we deduce
further propositions about the Being of Dasein, in accordance with formaI
rules of consistency? Or does this pre-supposing have the character of an
understanding projection, in such a manner indeed that the Interpretation
by which such an understanding gets developed, will let that which is to
be interpreted put itself into words for the very first time, so that it may decide
of its own accord whether, as the entiry which it is, it has that state of Being for
which it has been disclosed in the proJection with regard to its formal aspects?l Is
362

315

l'Oder hat dieses Voraus-setzen den Charakter des verstehenden Entwerfens, so zwar,
dass die so1ches Verstehen ausbildende Interpretation das Auszulegende gerade erst selbst
zu Wort kommen liisst, damit es von sich aus entscheide, ob es ais dieses Seiende die Seinsverfassung
hergibt, au!. welche es im Entwurfformalanzeigend erschlossen wurde?' Here, however, Heidegger
may be usmg the verb 'erschliessen' in the sense of'infer', in spite ofhis remarks on H. 75
above (see our note l, p. 105 ad loc.) and 'Entwurf' in the sense of 'sketch'.

Being and Time
363
there any other way at all by which an entity can put itself into words
with regard to its Being? We cannot ever 'avoid' a 'circular' proofin the
existential analytic, because such an analytic does not do any proving at
aU by the rules of the 'logic of consistency'. What common sense wishes
to eliminate in avoiding the 'circle', on the supposition that it is measuring
up to the loftiest rigour of scientific investigation, is nothing less than the
basic structure of care. Because it is primordially constituted by care, any
Dasein is already ahead of itself. As being, it has in every case already
projected itself upon definite possibilities of its existence; and' in such
existentiell projections it has, in a pre-ontological manner, also projected
something like existence and Being. Like aU research, the research which
wants to develop and conceptuaIize that kind of Being which belongs to
existence, is itself a kind of Being which disclosive Dasein possesses; can such
research be denied this projecting which is essential to Dasein?
Yet the 'charge of circularity' itself comes from a kind of Being which
belongs to Dasein. Something like a projection, even an ontological one,
still remains for the common sense of our concernful absorption in the
"they"; but it necessarilyseems strange to us, becausecommon sense barricades itselfagainst it 'on principle'. Common sense concerns itself, whether
'theoretically' or 'practically', only with entities which can be surveyed
at a glance circumspectively. What is distinctive in common sense is that
it has in view only the experiencing of 'factual' entities, in order that it
may be able to rid itself of an understanding ofBeing. It fails to recognize
that entities can be experienced 'factually' only when Being is already
understood, even ü it has not been conceptualized. Common sense misunderstands understanding. And therefore common sense must necessarily
pass off as 'violent' anything that lies beyond the reach of its understanding,
or any attempt to go out so far.
When one talks of the 'circle' in understanding, one expresses a failure
to recognize two things: (1) that understanding as such makes up a basic
kind of Dasein's Being, and (2) that this Being is constituted as care. To
deny the circle, to make a secret of it, or even to want to overcome it,
means finally to reinforce this failure. We must rather endeavour to leap
into the 'circle', primordially and wholly, so that even at the start of the
analysis of Dasein we make sure that we have a full view of Dasein's
circular Being. If, in the ontology of Dasein, we 'take our departure'
from a worldless "1" in order to provide this "1" with an Object and an
ontologically baseless relation to that Object, then we have 'presupposed'
not too much, but too Little. If we make a problem of 'life', and then just
occasionally have regard for death too, our view is tao short-sighted. The object
we have taken as our theme is artificially and dogmatically curtailed if 'in the

II. 3

316

364
Being and Time
II. 3
first instance' we restrict ourselves to a 'theoretical subject', in order
that we may then round it out 'on the practical side' by tacking on an
'ethic'.
This may suffice to clarify the existential meaning of the hermeneutical
Situation of a primordial analytic of Dasein. By exhibiting anticipatory
resoluteness, we have brought Dasein before us with regard to its authentic
totality, so that we now have it in advance. The authenticity of the
potentiality-for-Being-one's-Self guarantees that primordial existentiality
is something we see in advance, and this assures us that we are coining
the appropriate existential concepts. 1
At the same time our analysis of anticipatory resoluteness has led us to
the phenomenon ofprimordial and authentic truth. We have shown earlier
how that understanding-of-Being which prevails proximally and for the
most part, conceives Being in the sense of presence-at-hand, and so covers
up the primordial phenomenon of truth. 1X If, however, 'there is' Being
only in so far as truth 'is', and if the understanding of Being varies according to the kind of truth, then truth which is primordial and authentic
must guarantee the understanding of the Being of Dasein and of Being
in general. The ontological 'truth' of the existential analysis is developed
on the ground of the primordial existentiell truth. However, the latter
does not necessarily need the former. The most primordial and basic
existential truth, for which the problematic of fundamental ontology
strives in preparing for the question of Being in general, is the disclosedness
of the meaning of the Being of care. In order to lay bare this meaning,
we need to hold in readiness, undiminished, the full structural content of
care.
~ 64. Care and Selfhood

317

Through the unity of the items which are constitutive for careexistentiality, facticity, and fallenness-it has become possible to give the
first ontological definition for the totality of Dasein's structural whole.
We have given an existential formula for the structure of care as "aheadof-itself-Being-already-in (a world) as Being-alongside (entities encountered within-the-world)".2 We have seen that the care-structure does not
first arise from a coupling together, but is articulated aIl the same. X In
assessing this ontological result, we have had to estimate how weIl it
~ 'Die Eigentlichkeit des Selbstseinkonnens verbürgt die Vor-sicht au! die ursprüngliche
Existenzialitat, und diese sichert die Pragung der angemessenen existenzialen Begriffiichkei~.' The ambiguity of our 'this' reflects a similar ambiguity in Heidegger's 'diese',
whlch may refer either to 'die Vor-sicht' or to 'die ursprüngliche Existenzialitat'.
Il 'Sich-vorweg-schon-sein-in (einer Welt) als Sein-bei (innerweltlich begegnenden
Seienden)'. Here we follow tlie earlier editions. In the later editiQns there is a hyphen
instead ofa dash between 'vorweg' and 'schon',

Il. 3
Being and Time
365
satisfies the requirements for a primordial Interpretation of Dasein. x1 The
upshot of these considerations has been that neither the whole of Dasein
nor its authentic potentiality-for-Being bas ever been made a theme. The
structure of care, however, seems to be precisely where the attempt to
grasp the whole ofDasein as a phenomenon bas foundered. The "ahead-ofitself" presented itself as a "not-yet". B~t when the "ahead-of-itself" which
had been characterized as something still outstanding, was considered in
genuinely existential manner, it revealed itself as Being-towards-the-endsomething which, in the depths ofits Being, every Dasein is. We made it plain
at the same time that in the Call ofconscience care summons Dasein towards
its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. When we came to understand in a primordial manner how this appeal is understood, we saw that the understanding of it manifests itself as anticipatory resoluteness, which includes an
authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole-a potentiality of Dasein. Thus
the care-structure does not speak against the possibility of Being-a-whole
but is the condition for the possibility of such an existentiell potentiality-forBeing. In the course of these analyses, it became plain that the existential
phenomena of death, conscience, and guilt are anchored in the phenomenon of care. The totality of the structural whole kas become even more richly
aTticulated; and because of this, the existential question of the unity of this totality
kas become still more urgent.
How are we to conceive this unity? How can Dasein exist as a unity in
the ways and possibilities of its Being which we have mentioned? Manifestly, it can so exist only in such a way that it is itself this Being in its
essential possibilities-that in each case 1 am this entity. The '1' seems to
'hold together' the totality of the structural whole. In the 'ontology' of
this entity, the 'l'and the 'Self' have been conceived from the earliest
times as the supporting ground (as substance or subject). Even in its
preparatory characterization of everydayness, our analytic has already
come up against the question of Dasein's "who". It has been shown that
proximally and for the most part Dasein is not itselfbut is lost in the theyself, which is an existentiell modification of the authentic Self. The
question of the ontological constitution of Selfhood has remained unanswered. In principle, of course, we have aIready fixed upon a clue for
this problem;xl1 for if the Selfbelongs to the essential [wesenhaften] attributes of Dasein, while Dasein's 'Essence' ["Essenz"] lies in existence, then
''l''-hood and Selfhood must be conceived existentially. On the negative
side, it has also been shown that our ontological characterization of the
"they" prohibits us from making any use of categories of presence-athand (such as substance). It has become clear, in principle, that ontologically care is not to be derived from Reality or to be built up with the

318

3 19

366
Being and Time
II. 3
categories of Reality.XUi Care already harbours in itself the phenomenon
of the Self, if indeed the thesis is correct that the expression 'care for
oneself' ["Selbstsorge"], would be tautological if it were proposed in conformity with the term "solicitude" [Fürsorge] as care for Others. xiv But in
that case the problem of defining ontologically the Selfhood of Dasein
gets sharpened to the question of the existential 'connection' between care
and Selfhood.
To clarify the existentiality ofthe Self, we take as our 'natural' point of
departure Dasein's everyday interpretation of the Self. In saying "1",
Dasein expresses itself about 'itself'. It is not necessary that in doing so
Dasein should make any utterance. With the 'l', this entity has itself in
view. The content of this expression is regarded as something utterly
simple. In each case, it just stands for me and nothing further. Also, this
'l', as something simple, is not an attribute of other Things; it is not
itself a predicate, but the absolute 'subject'. What is expressed and what is
addressed in saying "1", is always met as the same persisting something.
The characteristics of'simplicity', 'substantiality', and 'personality', which
Kant, for instance, made the basis for his doctrine 'of the paralogisms of
pure reason' ,xv arise from a genuine pre-phenomenological experience.
The question remains whether that which we have experienced ontically
in this way may be Interpreted ontologically with the help of the 'categories' mentioned.
Kant, indeed, in strict conformitywith the phenomenal content given in
saying "1", shows that theontical thesesabout the soul-substance which have
been inferred [erschlossenen] from these characteristics, are without justification. But in so doing, he merely rejects a wrong ontical explanation of the
"1" ; he has by no means achieved an ontological Interpretation ofSelfhood,
nor has he even obtained some assurance of it and made positive preparation
for it. Kant makes a more rigorous attempt than his predecessors to keep
hold of the phen<;>menal content of saying "1"; yet even though in theory
he has denied that the ontical foundations of the ontology ofthe substantial
apply to the "1", he still slips back into tms sameinappropriate ontology. This
will be shown more exactly, in order that we may establish what it means
ontologically to take saying "1" as the starting-point for the analysis of
Selfhood. The Kantian analysis of the '1 think' is now to be adduced as an
illustration, but onlyso far as is demanded for c1arifying these problems. xvi
The '1' is a bare consciousness, accompanying all concepts. In the
'l', 'nothing more is represented than a transcendental subject of
thoughts'. 'Consciousness in itself (is) not so much a representation ... as
it is a form of representation in general.'xvu The '1 think' is 'the form of
apperception, which clings to every experience and precedes it'.xvUi

Il. 3

Being and Time
367
Kant grasps the phenomenal content of the '1' correctly in the expression '1 think', or-if one also pays heed to including the 'practical person'
when one speaks of 'intelligence'-in the expression '1 take action'. In
Kant's sense we must take saying "1" as saying "1 think". Kant tries to
establish the phenomenal content of the "1" as res cogitans. If in doing so
he calls this "1" a 'logical subject', that does not mean that the "1" in
general is a concept obtained merely by way oflogic. The "1" is rather the
subject of logical behaviour, of binding together. '1 think' means '1 bind
together'. AlI binding together is an '1 bind together'. In any takingtogether or relating, the "1" always underlies-the V1TOK€l/L€vov. The
subjectum is therefore 'consciousness in itself', not a representation but
rather the 'form' of representation. That is to say, the "1 think" is not
something represented, but the formaI structure of representing as such,
and this formaI structure alone makes it possible for anything to have
been represented. When we speak of the "form" of representation, we
have in view neither a framework nor a universal concept, but that which,
as €lôos, makes every representing and everything represented be
what it is. If the "1" is understood as the form of representation, this
amounts to saying that it is the 'logical subject'.
Kant's analysis has two positive aspects. For one thing, he sees the
impossibility of ontically reducing the "1" to a substance; for another
thing, he holds fast to the "1" as '1 think'. Nevertheless, he takes this "1"
as subject again, and he does so in a sense which is ontologically inappropriate. For the ontological concept of the subject characterizes not the Selfhood of the "1" qua Self, but the selfsameness and steadiness of something that is
always present-at-hand. To define the "1" ontologically as "subject" means
to regard it as something always present-at-hand. The- Being of the "1"
is understood as the Reality of the res cogitans. Xix
But how does it come about that while the '1 think' gives Kant a
genuine phenomenal starting-point, he cannot exploit it ontologically, and
has to fall back on the 'subject'-that is to say, something substantial? The
"1" is not just an '1 think', but an '1 think something'. And does not
Kant himselfkeep on stressing that the "1" remains related to its representations, and would be nothing without them?
For Kant, however, these representations are the 'empirical', which is
'accompanied' by the ''l''-the appearances to which the "1" 'c1ings'.
Kant nowhere shows the kind ofBeing ofthis 'clinging' and 'accompanying'. At bottom, however, their kind ofBeing is understood as the constant
Being-present-at-hand of the "1" along with its representations. Kant has
indeed avoided cutting the "1" adrift from thinking; but he has done so
without starting with the '1 think' itself in its full essential content as an

3 20

321

368
Being and Time
II. 3
'1 think something', and above all, without seeing what is ontologically
'presupposed' in taking the '1 think something' as a basic characteristic
of the Self. For even the '1 think something' is not definite enough ontologically as a starting-point, because the 'something' remains indefinite.
If by this "something" we understand an entity within-the-world, then it
tacitly implies that the world has been presupposed; and this very phenomenon of the world co-determines the state of Being of the "1", ifindeed
it is to be possible for the "1" to be something like an '1 think something'.
ln saying "1",1 have in view the entity which in each case 1 am as an '1am-in-a-world'. Kant did not see the phenomenon of the world, and was
consistent enough to keep the 'representations' apart from the a priori
content of the '1 think'. But as a consequence the "1" was again forced
back to an isolated subject, accompanying representations in a way which
is ontologically quite indefinite. xx
In saying "1", Dasein expresses itself as Being-in-the-world. But does saying
"1" in the everyday manner have itself in view as being-in-the-world
[in-der-Welt-seiend]? Here we must make a distinction. When saying
"1", Dasein surely has in view the entity which, in every case, it is itself.
The everyday interpretation of the Self, however, has a tendency to
understand itselfin terms of the 'world' with which it is concerned. When
Dasein bas itselfin view ontically, itfails to see itselfin relation to the kind
of Being of that entity which it is itself. And this holds especially for the
basic state, of Dasein, Being-in-the-world.xx1
What is the motive for this 'fugitive' way of saying ''l''? It is motivated
by Dasein's falling; for as falling, it flees in the face of itself into the
"they".l When the "1" talks in the 'natural' manner, this is performed by
the they-self. Il What expresses itself in the '1' is that-Selfwhich, proximally and for the most part, 1 am not authentically. When one is absorbed
in the everyday multiplicity and the rapid succession [Sich-jagen] ofthat
with which one is concerned, the Selfofthe self-forgetful "1 am concerned'
shows itselfas something simple which is constantly selfsame but indefinite
and empty. Yet one is that with which one concerns oneself. In the
'natural' ontical way in which the "1" talks, the phenomenal content of
the Dasein which one has in view in the"l" gets overlooked; but this gives
nojustijication fir our joining in this overlooking of it, or for forcing upon the
problematic of the Self an inappropriate 'categorial' horizon when we
Interpret the "1" ontologically.
Of course by thus refusing to follow the everyday way in which the "1"
l 'Durch das Verfallen des Daseins, ais welches es vor sich selbst flieht in das Man.'
The 'es' appears only in the later editions.
Il 'Die "natürliche" Ich-Rede vollzieht das Man-selbst.'

II. 3

Being and Time
369
talks, our ontological Interpretation of the '1' has by no means solved the
problem; but it has indeed prescribed the direction for any further inquiries.
ln the "1", we have in view that entity which one is in 'being-in-theworld'.
Being-already-in-a-world, however, as Being-alongside-the-ready-tohand-within-the-world, means equiprimordially that one is ahead of
oneself. With the 'l', what Wf have in view is that entity for which the
issue is the Being of the entity mat it is. With the 'l', care expresses itself,
though proximally and for the most part in the 'fugitive' way in which
the "1" talks when it concerns itself with something. The they-self keeps
on saying "1" most loudly and most frequently because at bottom it is not
authentically itself, and evades its authentic potentiality-for-Being. If the
ontological constitution of the Self is not to be traced back either to an
''l''-substance or to a 'subject', but if, on the contrary, the everyday
fugitive way in which we keep on saying "1" must be understood in terms
of our authentic potentiality-for-Being, then the proposition that the Self
is the basis of care and constantly present-at-hand, is one that still does
not follow. Selfhood is to be discerned existentially only in one's authentic
potentiality-for-Being-one's-Self-that is to say, in the authenticity of
Dasein's Being as care. In terms of care the constancy of the Self, as the
supposed persistence of the subjectum, gets clarified. But the phenomenon
of this authentic potentiality-for-Being also opens our eyes for the constancy
of the Self in the sense of its having achieved some sort of position. 1 The
constancy of the Self, in the double sense of steadiness and steadfastness, is
the authentic counter-possibility to the non-Self-constancy which is characteristic ofirresolute falling.1l Existentially, "Self-constancy" signifies nothing
other than anticipatory resoluteness. The ontological structure of such
resoluteness reveals the existentiality of the Self's Selfhood.
Dasein is authentical[v itself in the primordial individualization of the
reticent resoluteness which exacts anxiety of itself. As something that keeps
l ' ••• fûr die Stiindigkeit des Selbst in dem Sinn des Standgewonnenhabens.' Here our
usual translation of 'Stiindigkeit' as 'constancy' seems inadequate; possibly 'stability'
would be doser to what is meant.
Il 'Die Stiindigkeit des Selbst im DoppeIsinne der bestiindigen Standfestigkeit ist die
eigentliche Gegenmoglichkeit zur Unselbst-standigkeit des unentschlossenen Verfallens.'
The italicization of the opening words of this sentence appears only in the later editions.
Here, as on H. 117 and 303, Heidegger exploits various meanings of the adjective
'stiindig' and other words derived from the base 'sta-', with the root-meaning of
'standing'. The noun 'Unselbstandigkeit' ordinarily stands for inability to stand on
one's own feet or to make up one's mind independently.· But Heidegger expands it
to 'Unselbst-stiindigkeit', which not onlysuggests instability and a failure to stand by
oneself, but aIso the constancy or stability of that which is other than the Self-the
non-Self, or more specifically, the they-self. In the fol1owing sentence the noun 'Selbstiindigkeit', which ordinarily stands for autonomy, independence, or self-subsistence, is
similarlyexpanded to 'Selbst-standigkeit'-'Self-constancy'.

32 3

37 0
Being and Time
II. 3
silent, authentic Being-one's-Selfisjust the sort ofthing that does not keep
on saying '1'; but in its reticence it ois' that thrown entity as which it can
authentically be. The Self which the reticence of resolute existence unveils is the primordial phenomenal basis for the question as to the Being
of the '1'. ünly if we are oriented phenomenally by the meaning of the
Being of the authentic potentiality-for-Being-one's-Self are we put in a
position to discuss what ontological justification there is for treating
substantiality, simplicity, and personality as characteristics of Selfhood.
In the prevalent way of saying "1", it is constantly suggested that what
we have in advance is a Self-Thing, persistently present-at-hand; the
ontological question of the Being of the Self must turn away from any
such suggestion.
Care does not need to be founded in a Self. But existentiality, as constitutive for
care, provides the ontological constitution of Dasein's Self-constancy, to which there
belongs, in accordance with the full structural content of care, its Being-fallen
factically into non-Self-constancy. When fully conceived, the care-structure
includes the phenomenon of Selfhood. This phenomenon is clarified by
Interpreting the meaning of care; and it is as care that Dasein's totality
of Being has been defined.
~ 65. Temporality as the Ontological Meaning of Care

324

In characterizing the 'connection' between care and Selfhood, our aim
was not only to clarify the special problem of ''l''-hood, but also to help
in the final preparation for getting into our grasp phenomenally the
totality of Dasein's structural whole. We need the unwavering discipline of
the existential way of putting the question, if, for our ontological point of
view, Dasein's kind of Being is not to be finally perverted into a mode of
presence-at-hand, even one which is wholly undifferentiated. Dasein
becomes 'essentially' Dasein in that authentic existence which constitutes
itself as anticipatory resoluteness. 1 Such resoluteness, as a mode of the
authenticity of care, contains Dasein's primordial Self-constancy and
totality. We must take an undistracted look at these and understand
them existentially ifwe are to lay bare the ontological meaning ofDasein's
Being.
What are we seeking ontologically with the meaning of care? What
does "meaning" signify? In our investigation, we have encountered this
phenomenon in connection with the analysis of understanding and interpretation. XXI1 According to that analysis, meaning is that wherein the
understandability [Verstehbarkeit] of something maintains itself-even
l 'Das Dasein wird "wesentlich" in der eigentlichen Existenz, die sich ais vorlaufende
Entschlossenheit konstituiert.'

II. 3

Being and Time
37 1
that of something which does not come into view explicitly and thematically. "Meaning" signifies the "upon-which" [das Woraufhin] ofa primary
projection in terms of which something can be conceived in its possibility
as that which it is. Projecting discloses possibilities-that is to say, it
discloses the sort of thing that makes possible.
To lay bare the "upon-which" of a projection, amounts to disclosing
that which makes possible what has been projected. 1 To lay it bare in this
way requires methodologically that we study the projection (usually a
tacit one) which underlies an interpretation, and that we do so in such a
way that what has been projected in the projecting can be disclosed and
grasped with regard to its "upon-which". To set forth the meaning of
care means, then, to follow up the projection which guides and underlies
the primordial existential Interpretation of Dasein, and to follow it up in
such a way that in what is here projected, its "upon-which" may be seen.
What has been projected is the Being of Dasein, and it is disclosed in what
constitutes that Being as an authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. 2
That upon which the Being which has been disclosed and is thus constituted has been projected, is that which itself makes possible this Constitution ofBeing as care. When we inquire about the meaning of care, we
are asking what makes possible the totality of the articulated structural whole of
care, in the unity of its articulation as we have unfolded it.
Taken strictly, "meaning" signifies the "upon-which" of the primary
projection of the understanding of Being. When Being-in-the-world has
been disclosed to itself and understands the Being of that entity which it
itself is, it understands equiprimordially the Being of entities discovered
within-the-world, even if such Being h~s not been made a theme, and has
not yet even been differentiated into its primary modes of existence and
Reality. AlI ontical experience of entities-both circumspective calculation of the ready-to-hand, and positive scientific cognition of the presentat-hand-is based upon projections of the Being of the corresponding
entities-projections which in every case are more or less transparent.
But in these projections there lies hidden the "upon-which" of the
projection; and on this, as it were, the understanding of Being nourishes
itself.
If we say that entities 'have meaning', this signifies that they have
become accessible in their Being; and this Being, as projected upon its
l 'Das Woraufhin eines Entwurfs freilegen, besagt, das erschliessen, was das Entworfene
ermoglicht.' This sentence is ambiguous in that 'das Entworfene' ('what is projected')
may be either the subject or the direct object of'ermoglicht' ('makes possible').
Il 'Das Entworfene ist das Sein des Daseins und zwar erschlossen in dem, was es ais
eigentliches Ganzseinkonnen konstituiert.' This sentence too is ambiguous in its structure;
we have chosen the interpretation which seems most plausible in the light of the fol1owing
sentence.

325

372
Being and TirM
II. 3
"upon-which", is what 'really' 'has meaning' first of aIl. Entities 'have'
meaning only because, as Being which has been disclosed beforehand,
they become intelligible in the projection of that Being-that is to say, in
terms of the "upon-which" of that projection. The primary projection
of the understanding of Being 'gives' the meaning. The question about
the meaning of the Being of an entity takes as its theme the "uponwhich" of that understanding of Being which underlies aIl Being of
entities. 1
Dasein is either authentically or inauthentically disclosed to itself as
regards its existence. In existing, Dasein understands itself, and in such a
way, indeed, that this understandin gdoes not merely get something in its
grasp, but makes up the existentiell Being of its factical potentiality-forBeing. The Being which is disclosed is that of an entity for which this
Being is an issue. The meaning of this Being-that is, of care-is what
makes care possible in its Constitution; and it is what makes up primordially the Being of this potentiality-for-Being. The meaning of Dasein's
Being is not something free-floating which is other than and 'outside of'
itself, but is the self-understanding Dasein itself. What makes possible
the Being of Dasein, and therewith its factical existence?
That which was projected in the primordial existential projection of
existence has revealed itself as anticipatory resoluteness. What makes this
authentic Being-a-whole of Dasein possible with regard to the unity of
its articulated structural whole?2 Anticipatory resoluteness, when taken
formally and existentially, without our constantly designating its full
structural content, is Being towards one's ownmost, distinctive potentialityfor-Being. This sort of thing is possible only in that Dasein can,
indeed, come towards itself in its ownmost possibility, and that it can put
up with this possibility as a possibility in thus letting itself come towards
itself-in other words, that it exists. This letting-itself-corM-towards-itself
in that distinctive possibility which it puts up with, is the primordial
phenomenon of the future as coming towards. 3 If either authentic or
l'Die Frage nach dem Sinn des Seins eines Seienden macht das Woraufhin des allem
Sein van Seiendem zugrundeliegenden Seinsverstehens zum Thema.' The earlier editians
read ' ... des allem ontischen Sei n z u Seiendem •• .' ('••• all ontical Being wwards
entities .. .')
li 'Was ermoglicht dieses eigentliche Ganzsein des Daseins hinsichtlich der Einheit
seines gegliederten Strukturganzen?'
3 'Das die ausgezeichnete Moglichkeit aushaltende, in ihr sich au! sich Zukommenlassen ist das ursprüngliche Phanomen der Zu-kunft.' While the hyphen in 'Zukommenlassen' appears only in the later editions, the more important hyphen in 'Zu-kunft' appears
in bath later and earlier editions. In the later editians, however, it cornes at the end of the
line, so that the force which was presumably intended is lost.
Withaut the hyphen, 'Zukunft' is the ordinary word far 'the future'; with the hyphen,
Heidegger evidently wishes to call attentian to its kinship with the expression 'zukammen

II. 3
Being and Time
373
inauthentic Being-towards-death bel6ngs to Dasein's Being, then such
Being-towards-death is possible only as something futural [aIs <.ukünjtiges], in the sense which we have now indicated, and which we
have still to define more closely. By the term 'futural', we do not here
have in view a "now" which has notyet become 'actual' and which sometime will he for the first time. We have in view the coming [Kunft] in
which Dasein, in its ownmost potentiality-for-Being, comes towards itself.
Anticipation makes Dasein authentically futuraJ, and in such a waythat the
anticipation itself is possible only in so far as Dasein, as heing, is always
coming towards itself-that is to say, in so far as it is futural in its Being
in general.
Anticipatory resoluteness understands Dasein in its own essential
Being-guilty. This understanding means that in existing one takes over
Being-guilty; it means heing the thrown basis of nullity. But taking
over thrownness signifies heing Dasein authentically as it already was. 1
Taking over thrownness, however, is possible only in such a way that the
futural Dasein can he its ownmost 'as-it-already-was'-that is to say, its
'been' [sein "Gewesen"]. Only in so far as Dasein is as an "I-am-as-havingbeen", can Dasein come towards itself futurally in such a way that it
comes hack. 2 As authentically futural, Dasein is authentically as "having
heen". 3 Anticipation of one's uttermost and ownmost possibility is coming
back understandingly to one's ownmost "been". Only so far as it is futuraJ
can Dasein he authentically as having been. The character of "having
been" arises, in a certain way, from the future. 4
Anticipatory resoluteness discloses the current Situation of the "there"
in such a way that existence, in taking action, is circumspectively concerned with what is factically ready-to-hand environmentally. Resolute
auf .... ('to come towards •. .' or 'to came up to .• .') and its derivation from 'zu' ('ta'
or 'towards') and 'kommen' ('came'). Hence our hendiadys. (The use af'zukommen' with
the preposition 'auf' is to be distinguished from a use of this same verb with the dative
which we have met in earlier chapters in the sense of 'belangs to .• .', 'is becaming
to •. .', or 'has caming to •• .'.)
l 'übemahme der Gewarfenheit aber bedeutet, das Dasein in dem, wie es je schon war,
eigentlich sein.'
l 'Nur safem Dasein überhaupt ist aIs ich bin-gewesen, kann es zukünftig auf sich selbst
10 zukammen, dass es zurück-kammt.' Many German verbs farm their perfect tense with
the help of the auxiliary 'sein' ('ta be') in place af the somewhat more usual 'haben'
('have'), just as we sametimes say in English 'he is gone' instead of 'he has gone'.
Amang such verbs is 'sein' itself. This '1 have been' is expressed by 'ich bin gewesen'; this
might be translated as '1 am been', but in this context we have ventured to translate it as
CI am as having been'.
8 'Eigentlich zukünftig ist das Dasein eigentlich gewesen.'
~ 'Die Gewesenheit entspringt in gewisser Weise der Zukunft.' Here 'The character af
having been' represents 'Die Gewesenheit' (literally, 'beenhood'). Heidegger distinguishes
this sharply from 'die Vergangenheit' ('pastness'). We shall frequently translate 'Gewesenheit' simply as 'having been'.

3 26

374
Being and Time
II. 3
Being-alongside what is ready-to-hand in the Situation-that is to say,
taking action in such a way as to let one encounter what kas presence
environmentally-is possible only by making such an entity present. Only
as the Present [Gegenwart]l in the sense ofmaking present, can resoluteness
be what it is: namely, letting itselfbe encountered undisguisedly by that
which it seizes upon in taking action.
Coming back to itself futuraHy, resoluteness brings itself into the
Situation by making present. The character of "having been" arises from
the future, and in such a way that the future which "has been" (or better,
which "is in the process of having been") releases from itself the Present. 2
This phenomenon has the unity of a future which makes present in
the process of having been; we designate it as "temporality".3 Only in so
far as Dasein has the definite character of temporality, is the authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole of anticipatory resoluteness, as we have
described it, made possible for Dasein itself. Temporality reveals itself as the
meaning of authentic care.
The phenomenal content of this meaning, drawn from the state of
Being of anticipatory resoluteness, fills in the signification of the term
"temporality". In our terminological use ofthis expression, we must hold
ourselves alooffrom aH those significations of 'future', 'past', and 'Present'
which thrust themselves upon us from the ordinary conception of time.
This holds also for conceptions of a 'time' which is 'subjective' or 'Objective', 'immanent' or 'transcendent'. Inasmuch as Dasein understands
itself in a way which, proximaHy and for the most part, is inauthentic, we
may suppose that 'time' as ordinarily understood does indeed represent
a genuine phenomenon, but one which is derivative rein abkünftiges]. It
arises from inauthentic temporality, which has a source of its own. The
conceptions of 'future', 'past' and 'Present' have first arisen in terms of
the inauthentic way ofunderstanding time. In terminologicaHy delimiting
the primordial and authentic phenomena which correspond to these, we
have to struggle against the same difficulty which keeps aH ontological
terminology in its grip. When violences are done in this field of investigation, they are not arbitrary but have a necessity grounded in the
facts. If, however, we are to point out without gaps in the argument,
how inauthentic temporality has its source in temporality which is
10n our expressions 'having presence', 'making present', and 'the Present', see our
notes 1 and 2, p. 47, and 2, p. 48 on H. 25 above.
2 'Die Gewesenheit entspringt der Zukunft, so zwar, dass die gewesene (besser gewesende) Zukunft die Gegenwart aus sich entHisst.' Heidegger has coine<! the form 'gewesend' by fusing the past participle 'gewesen' with the suffix of the present participle
'-end', as if in English one were to write 'beening'.
3 'Dies dergestalt ais gewesend-gegenwartigende Zukunft einheitliche Phanomen
nennen wir die <:,eitlichkeit.'

II. 3
Being and Time
375
primordial and authentic, the primordial phenomenon, which we have
described only in a rough and ready fashion, must first be worked out
correctly.
If resoluteness makes up the mode of authentic care, and if this itself
is possible only through temporality, then the phenomenon at which we
have arrived by taking a look at resoluteness, must present us with only
a modality of temporality, by which, after aH, care as such is made
possible. Dasein's totality of Being as care means: ahead-of-itself-alreadybeing-in (a world) as Being-alongside (entities encountered within-theworld). When we first fixed upon this articulated structure, we suggested
that with regard to this articulation the ontological question must be
pursued still further back until the unity of the totality of this structural
manifoldness has been laid bare. xxiU The primordial unity of the structure of
care lies in temporality.
The "ahead-of-itself" is grounded in the future. In the "Being-alreadyin ...", the character of "having been" is made known. "Being-alongside
..." becomes possible in making present. While the "ahead" includes the
notion of a "before", 1 neither the 'before' in the 'ahead' nor the 'already'
is to be taken in terms of the way time is ordinarily understood; this has
been automaticaHy ruled out by what has been said above. With this
'before' we do not have in mind 'in advance ofsomething' [das "Vorher"]
in the sense of 'not yet now-but later'; the 'already' is just as far from
signifying 'no longer now-but earlier'. If the. expressions 'before' and
'already' were to have a time-oriented [zeithafte] signification such as
this (and they can have this signification too), then to say' that care has
temporality would be to say that it is something which is 'earlier' and
'later', 'not yet' and 'no longer'. Care would then be conceived as an entity
which occurs and runs its course 'in time'. The Being of an entity having
the character of Dasein would become something present-at-hand. If this
sort of thing is impossible, then any time-oriented signification which the
expressions we have mentioned may have, must be different from this.
The 'before' and the 'ahead' indicate the future as of a sort which would
make it possible for Dasein to be such that its potentiality-for-Being is
an issue. 2 Self-projection upon the 'for-the-sake-of-oneself' is grounded in
1 We have interpolated this clause in our translation to give point to Heidegger's
remark about 'the "before" in the "ahead'" ('das "Vor" im "Vorweg" 'l, which is
obvious enough in German but would otherwise seem very far-fetched in English. We
have of course met the expression 'vor' in many contexts-in 'Vorhabe','Vorsicht', and
'Vorgriff' as 'fore-structures' of understanding (H. 150), and in such expressions as 'that in
the face ofwhich' ('das "Wovor" ') one fears or Bees or has anxiety (H. 140, 184,251,
etc.). Here, however, the translation 'before' seems more appropriate.
2 'Das "vor" und "vorweg" zeigt die Zukunft an, ais welche sie überhaupt erst ermoglicht, dass Dasein so sein kann, dass es ihm um sein Seinkonnen geht.' The pronoun 'sie'
appears only in the later editions.

376
Being and Time
II. 3
the future and is an essential characteristic of existentiality. The primary
meaning of existentiality is the future.
3 28
Likewise, with the 'already' we have in view the existential temporal
meaning of the Being of that entity which, in so far as it is, is already
something that has been thrown. Only because care is based on the
character of "having been", can Dasein exist as the thrown entity which
it is. 'As long as' Dasein factically exists, it is never past [vergangen], but it
always is indeed as already having been, in the sense of the "1 am-as-havingbeen". And only as long as Dasein is, can it be as having been. On the
other hand, we calI an entity "past", when it is no longer present-at-hand.
Therefore Dasein, in existing, can never establish itself as a fact which is
present-at-hand, arising and passing away 'in the course of rime', with a
bit of it past already. Dasein never 'finds itself' except as a thrown Fact.
In the state-of-mind in which it finds itselJ, Dasein is assailed by itself as the
entity which it still is and already was-that is to say, which it constantly
is as having been. 1 The primary existential meaning of facticity lies in
the character of "having been". In our formulation of the structure ofcare,
the temporal meaning of existentiality and facticity is indicated by the
expressions 'before' and 'already'.
On the other hand, we lack such an indication for the third item which
is constitutive for care-the Being-aIongside which faIls. This should not
signify that falling is not also grounded in temporality; it should instead
give us a hint that making-present;~as the primary basis for falling into the
ready-to-hand and present-at-hand with which we concern ourselves,
remains included in the future and in having been, and is inc1uded in
these in the mode of primordial temporality. When resolute, Dasein has
brought itself back from falling, and bas done so precisely in order to be
more authentically 'there' in the 'moment of vision' as regards the Situation
which has been disc1osed. 2
Temporality makes possible the unity of existence, facticity, and falling,
and in this way constitutes primordially the totality of the structure of
care. The items of care have not been pieced together cumulatively any
more than temporality itself has been put together 'in the course of time'
["mit der Zeit"] out of the future, the having been, and the Present.
l'In der Befindlichkeit wird das Dasein von ibm selbst üherfallen ais das Seiende das
es, noc~ seiend~ schon ~ar, ~~ heiss~ gewesen standig ist.' We ha.ve exl?anded our ~ual
translation of Befindhchkelt to bnng out hetter the connectlon Wlth the previous
sentence.
li 'Entschlossen hat sich das Dasein gerade zurückgeholt aus dem Verafallen um desto
eigentlicher im "Augenblick" auf die erschlossene Situation "da" zu sein.' The German
word 'Augenblick' has hitherto been translated simply as 'moment'· but here and in
many later passages, I:Ieidegger has in min~ its more literai meaning-'a glan~e of the
eye'.. In such passages'lt.seems more appropnate to translate il as 'moment of vision'. See
SectlOn 68 helow, especlally H. 338.

Il.3
Being and Time
377
Temporality ois' not an entity at all. It is not, but it temporalizes itself.
Nevertheless, we cannot avoid saying, 'Temporality "is" ... the meaning
of care', 'Temporality "is" . . . defined in such and such a way'; the
reason for this can be made intelligible only when we have c1arified the
idea of Being and that of the Ois' in general. Temporality temporalizes,
and indeed it temporalizes possible ways of itself. These make possible the
multiplicity ofDasein's modes ofBeing, and especially the basic possibility
of auth~ntic or inauthentic existence.
The future, the character of having been, and the Present, show
the phenomenal characteristics of the 'towards-oneself', the 'backto', and the 'letting-oneself-be-encountered-by'.1 The phenomena of the
"towards ...", the "to ...", and the "alongside ...", make temporality
manifest as the €KCTTUnK6v pure and simple. Temporality is the primordial 'outside-of-itself' in and for itselj. We therefore calI the phenomena of the future,
the character of having been, and the Present, the" ecstases" of temporality. 2
TemporaIityisnot, prior to this, an entitywhich fust emerges from itselfj its
essence is a process of temporalizing in the unity ofthe ecstases. What is characteristic of the 'time' which is accessible to the ordinary understanding,
consists, among other things, precisely in the fact that it is a pure sequence
of "nows", without beginning and without end, in which the ecstaticaI
character of primordial temporality has been levelled off. But this very
levelling off, in accordance with its existential meaning, is grounded in
the possibility of a definite kind of temporalizing, in conformity with
which temporality temporalizes as inauthentic the kind of 'time' we have
just mentioned. If, therefore, we demonstrate that the 'time' which is
accessible to Dasein's common sense is not primordial, but arises rather
from authentic temporality, then, in accordance with the principle, "a
potiori fit denominatio", we are justified in designating as "primordial time"
the temporality which we have now laid bare.
l 'Zukunft, Gewesenheit, Gegenwart zeigen die phiinomenalen Charaktere des "Aufsich-zu", des "Zurück auf", des "Begegnenlassens von".' On these expressions cf. H. 326
above.
li 'Die Phiinomene des zu •.•, auf••., hei ••. offenbaren die Zeitlichkeit ais das 'KaTIlTUC&"
schlechthin. Zeitlichkeit ist Jas ursprüngliche "Ausser-sich" an undfür sich selbst. Wir nennen
daher die charakterisierten Phiinomene Zukunft, Gewesenheit, Gegenwart die Ekstasen
der Zeitlichkeit.'
The connection of the words 'zu', 'auf', and 'bei' with the expressions listed in the
preceding sentence, is somewhat obscure even in the Gennan, and is best clarified by a
study of the preceding pages. Briefly the correlation seems to he as follows:
zu: Zukunft;
aufsich zukommen; Auf-sich-zu;
Sich-vorweg.
auf: Gewesenheit; zurückkommen auf; Zurück auf;
Schon-sein-in.
bei: Gegenwart;
Begegnenlassen von; Sein-bei.
The root-meaning of the word 'ecstasis' (Greek ÉKaTIlUCS; German, 'Ekstase') is
'standing outside'. Used generally in Greek for the 'removal' or 'displacement' of sornething, it came to be applied to states-of-mind which we would now call 'ecstatic'. Heidegger usually keeps the basic root-meaning in mind, but he also is keenly aware of its close
connection with the root-meaning of the word 'existence'.

329

Being and Time
II. 3
In enumerating the ecstases, we have always mentioned the future first.
We have done this to indicate that the future has a priority in the ecstatical
unitY of primordial and authentic temporality. This is so, even though
temporality does not first arise through a cumulative sequence of the
ecstases, but in each case temporalizes itself in their equiprimordiality.
But within this equiprimordiality, the modes oftemporalizing are different.
The difference lies in the fact that the nature of the temporalizing can
be determined primarily in terms of the different ecstases. Primordial and
authentic temporality temporalizes itself in terms of the authentic
future and in such a way that in having been futuraIly, it first of
aIl awakens the Present. 1 The primary phenomenon of primordial and authentic
temporality is thefuture. The priority of the future will vary according to the
ways in which the temporalizing of inauthentic temporality itself is
modified, but it will still come to the fore even in the derivative kind of
'time'.ll
Care is Being-towards-death. We have defined "anticipatory resoluteness" as authentic Being towards the possibility which we have characterized as Dasein's utter impossibility. In such Being-towards-its-end, Dasein
exists in a way which is authentically whole as that entity which it can be
when 'thrown into death'. This entity does not have an end at which it
just stops, but it exists finitely. 3 The authentic future is temporalized primarily by that temporality which makes up the meaning of anticipatory
resoluteness; it thus reveals itself as finite. 4 But 'does not time go on' in
spite of my own no-Ionger-Dasein?5 And can there not be an unlimited
number of things which still lie 'in the future' and come along out of it?
We must answer these questions affirmatively. In spite of this, they do
not contain any objections to the finitude of primordial temporalitybecause this' is something which is no longer handled by these at aIl.
The question is not about everything that still can happen 'in a time that
goes on', or about what kind of letting-come-towards-oneself we can
encounter 'out of this tiine', but about how "coming-towards-oneself" is,
as such, to be primordially defined. Its finitude does not amount primarily
to a stopping, but is a characterisitic of temporalization itself. The primordial and authentic future is the "towards-oneself" (to oneself!) , 6 existing
378

330

l ' ••• dass sie zukünftig gewesen allererst die Gegenwart weckt.'

.2'• • • noch in der abkünftigen "Zeit",' Here Heidegger is contrasting the authentic

kmd of time in which Dasein 'cornes towards' itself futurally ['auf sich zukommt
zukünftig'] with the inauthentic kind of time which 'cornes off' from this or is 'derived'
from it ['abkommt'], and which is thus ofa 'derivative' ['abkünftig'] character.
3 , •• sondem existiert endlich.'
4 'Die eigentliche Zukunft, die primar die Zeitlichkeit zeitigt, die den Sinn der vorlaufenden Entschlossenheit ausmacht, enthüllt sich damit selbst ais endliche.'
6 'Allein "geht" trotz des Nichtmehrdaseins meiner selbst "die Zeit nicht weiter"?'
6 ' ••• das Auf-sich-zu, auf sich ...'

Il. 3
Being and Time
379
as the possibility of nullity, the possibility which is not to be outstripped.
The ecstatical character of the primordial future lies precisely in the fact
that the future closes one's potentiality-for-Being; that is to say, the
future itself is closed to one, l and as such it makes possible the resolutc
existentiell understanding of nullity. Primordial and authentic comingtowards-oneself is the meaning of existing in one's ownmost nullity. In
our thesis that temporality is primordially finite, we are not disputing
that 'time goes on'; we are simply holding fast to the phenomenal character of primordial temporality-a character which shows itself in what
is projected in Dasein's primordial existential projecting.
The temptation to overlook the finitude of the primordial and authentic
future and therefore the finitude of temporality, or alternatively, to hold
'a priori' that such finitude is impossible, arises from the way in which the
ordinary understanding of time is constantly thrusting itself to the fore.
If the ordinary understanding is right in knowing a time which is endless,
and in knowing only this, it has not yet been demonstrated that it also
understands this time and its 'infinity'. What does it mean to say, 'Time
goes on' or 'Time keep passing away?' What is the signification of 'in
time' in general, and of the expressions 'in the future' and 'out of the
future' in particular? In what sense is 'time' endless? Such points need to
be cleared up, if the ordinary objections to the finitude of primordial time
are not to remain groundless. But we can clear them up effectively only
if we have obtained an appropriate way of formulating the question as
regards finitude and in-finitude. Il Such a formulation, however, arises only
if we view the primordial phenomenon of time understandingly. The
problem is not one of how3 the 'derived' ["abgeleitete"] infinite time, 'in
which, the ready-to-hand arises and passes away, becomes primordial finite
temporality; the problem is rather that of how inauthentic temporality
arises out offinite authentic temporality, and how inauthentic temporality,
as inauthentic, temporalizes an in-finite time out of the finite. Only
because primordial time is finite can the 'derived' time temporalize
itself as infinite. In the order in which we get things into our grasp
through the understanding, the finitude of time does not become fully
visible until we have exhibited 'endless time' so that these may be
contrasted.
l ' .•• dass sie das Seinkonnen achliesst, das heisst selbst geschlossen ist •••' The verb
'schliessen', as here used, May Mean either to close or shut, or to conclude or bring to an
end. Presumably the author has both senses in mind.
:1 ' ••• hinsichtlich der Endlichkeit und Un-endlichkeit .. " We have tried to preserve
Heidegger's orthographic distinction between 'Unendlichkeit' and 'Un-endlichkeit' by
translating the former as 'infinity', the latter as 'in-finitude'. We shall similarly use
'infinite' and 'in·finite' for 'unendlich' and 'un-endlich' respectively.
3 This word ('wie') is italicized only in the later editions.

331

380
Being and Time
II. 3
Our analysis of primordial temporality up to this point may be summarized in the following theses. Time is primordial as the temporalizing
o~ temporality, and as such it makes possible the Constitution of the
structure of care. Temporality is essentially ecstatical. Temporality temporalizes itself primordially out of the future. Primordial time is finite.
However, the Interpretation of care as temporality cannot remain
restricted to the narrow basis obtained so far, even if it has taken us the
first steps along our way in viewing Dasein's primordial and authentic
Being-a-whole.The thesis that the meaning of Dasein is temporality must
be confirmed in the concrete content of this entity's basic state, as it has
been set forth.

332

~ 66. Dasein's Temporality and the Tasks Arising ThereJrom of Repeating the
Existential Ana!>,sis in a more Primordial Manner
Not only does the phenomenon of temporality which we have laid bare
demand a more widely-ranging confirmation of its constitutive power,
but only through such confirmation will it itself come into view as regards
the basic possibilities of temporalizing. The demonstration of the possibility of Dasein's state of Being on the basis of temporality will be
designated in brief-though only provisionally-as "the 'temporal' Interpretation".
Our next task is to go beyond the temporal analysis of Dasein's authentic
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole and a general characterization of the
temporality of care so that Dasein's inauthenticity may be made visible in
its own specifie temporality. Temporality first showed itselfin anticipatory
resoluteness. This is the authentic mode of disclosedness, though disclosedness maintains itself for the most part in the inauthenticity with
which the "they" fallingly interprets itself. In characterizing the temporality of disclosedness in general, we are led to the temporal understanding
ofthat concernful Being-in-the-world which lies closest to us, and therefore
of the average undifferentiatedness of Dasein from which the existential
analytic first took its start. xx1v We have called Dasein's average kind of
Being, in which it maintains itself proximaUy and for the most part,
"everydayness". By repeating the earlier analysis, we must reveal everydayness in its temporal meaning, so that the problematic included in
temporality may come to light, and the seemingly 'obvious' character of
the preparatory analyses may completely disappear. Indeed, confirmation
is to be found for temporality in all the essential structures of Dasein's
ba,sic constitution. Yet this will not lead to running through our analyses
again superficially and schematieally in the same sequence ofpresentation.
The course of our temporal analysis is directed otherwise: it is to make

II. 3
Being and Time
381
plainer the interconnection of our earlier considerations and to do away
with whatever is accidentaI and seemingly arbitrary. Beyond these necessities of method, however, the phenomenon itself gives us motives which
compel us to articulate our analysis in a different way when we repeat it.
The ontological structure of that entity which, in each case, 1 myself
am, centres in the Self-subsistence [Selbstandigkeit] of existence. Because
the Self cannot be conceived either as substance or as subject but is
grounded in existence, our analysis of the inauthentic Self, the "they",
has been left wholly in tow of the preparatory Interpretation ofDasein. xxv
Now that Selfhood has been explicit!>, taken back into the structure of
care, and therefore of temporality, the temporal Interpretation of Selfconstancy and non-Self-constancyl acquires an importance of its own.
This Interpretation needs ta be carried through separately and thematically. However, it not only gives us the right kind ofinsurance against the
paralogisms and against ontologically inappropriate questions about the
Being of the "1" in general, but it provides at the same time, in accordance with its central function, a more primordial insight into the
temporali{,ation-structure of temporality, which reveals itself as the historicality of Dasein. The proposition, "Dasein is historical", is confirmed as a
fundamental existential ontological assertion. This assertion is far removed
from the mere ontical establishment of the fact that Dasein occurs in a
'world-history'. But the historicality of Dasein is the basis for a possible
kind of historiological understanding which in turn carries with it the
possibility of getting a special grasp of the development of historiology
as a science.
By Interpreting everydayness and historicality temporally we shall get
a steady enough view of primordial time to expose it as the condition 333
which makes the everyday experience oftime both possible and necessary.
As an entity for which its Being is an issue, Dasein utili{,es itself primarily
for itself [verwendet sich •.• fir sich selbst], whether it does so explicitly or
not. Proximally and for the most part, care is circumspective concern.
In utilizing itselffor the sake of itself, Dasein 'uses itself up'. In using itself
up, Dasein uses itself-that is to say, its time. 1l ln using time, Dasein
reckons with it. Time is first discovered in the concern which reckons
l '••• Selbst-stiindigkeit und Unselbst-stiindigkeit •.•' Cf. note 2, p. 369, H. 322.
2 'Umwillen seiner selbst verwendend, "verbraucht" sich das Dasein. Sichverbruchend
braucht das Dasein sich selbst, dass heisst seine Zeit.' Here three verbs, all ofwhich might
sometimes he translated as 'use', are contrasted rather subtly. 'Verwenden' means
literally to 'turn something away', but is often used in the sense of 'turning something to
account', 'utilizing it'; in a reflexive construction such as we have here, it often takes on
the more special meaning of 'applying oneself' on someone's behalf. (In previous passages
we have generally translated 'verwenden' as 'use'.) 'Verbrauchen' means to 'consume'
or 'use up'. 'Brauchen' too means to 'use'; but it also means to 'need', and it is hard to tell
which of these senses Heidegger here has in mind.

382
Being and Time
Ir. 3
circumspectively, and this concern leads to the development of a timereckoning. Reckoning with time is constitutive for Being-in-the-world.
Concernful circumspective discovering, in reckoning with its time, permits
those things which we have discovered, and which are ready-to-hand or
present-at-hand, to be encountered in time. Thus entities within-theworld become accessible as 'being in time'. We call the temporal attribute
of entities within-the-world "within-time-ness" [die Innerzeitkeit]. The kind
of 'time' which is first found ontically in within-time-ness, becomes the
basis on which the ordinary traditional conception of time takes form.
But time, as within-time-ness, arises from an essential kind oftemporalizing
of primordial temporality. The fact that this is its source, tells us that the
time 'in which' what is present-at-hand arises and passes away, is a genuine
phenomenon of time; it is not an externalization of a 'qualitative time'
into space, as Bergson's Interpretation of time-which is ontologically
quite indefinite and inadequate-would have us believe.
In working out the temporality of Dasein as everydayness, historicality,
and within-time-ness, we shall be getting for the first time a relentless
insight into the complications of a primordial ontology of Dasein. As Beingin-the-world, Dasein exists factically with and alongside entities which it
encounters within-the-world. Thus Dasein's Being becomes ontologically
transparent in a comprehensive way only within the horizon l in which
the Being of entities other than Dasein-and this means even of those
which are neither ready-to-hand nor present-at-hand but just 'subsist'has been clarified. But if the variations of Being are to be Interpreted for
everything ofwhich we say, "It is", we need an idea of Being in general,
and this idea needs to have been adequately illumined in advance. So
long as this idea is one at which we have not yet arrived, then the temporal
analysis of Dasein, even ifwe repeat it, will remain incomplete and fraught
with obscurities; we shall not go on to talk about the objective
difficulties. The existential-temporal analysis of Dasein demands, for its
part, that it be repeated anew within a framework in which the concept
of Being is discussed in principle.
l 'Das Sein des Daseins empfangt daher seine umfassende ontologische Durchsichtigkeit
erst im Horizont .. .' In the oider editions 'erst' appears after 'daher' rather than after
'Durchsichtigkeit'•

IV
TEMPORALITY AND EVER YDAYNESS
~ 67. The Basic Content of Dasein's Existential Constitution, and a Preliminary
Sketch of the Temporal Interpretation of it
OUR preparatory analysis1 has made accessible a multiplicity of phenomena; and no matter how much we may concentrate on the foundational
structural totality of care, these must not be allowed to vanish from our
phenomenological purview. Far from excluding such a multiplicity, the
primordial totality of Dasein's constitution as articulated demands it. The
primordiality of a state of Being does not coincide with the simplicity and
uniqueness of an ultimate structural element. The ontological source of
Dasein's Being is not 'inferior' to what springs from it, but towers above
it in power from the outset; in the field of ontology, any 'springing-from'
is degeneration. If we penetrate to the 'source' ontologically, we do not
come to things which are ontically obvious for the 'common understanding' ; but the questionable character of everything obvious opens up for us.
If we are to bring back into our phenomenological purview the phenomena at which we have arrived in our preparatory analysis, an allusion
to the stages through which we have passed must be sufficient. Our
definition of "care" emerged from our analysis of the disclosedness which
constitutes the Being of the 'there'. The clarification of this phenomenon
signified that we must give a provisional Interpretation of Being-in-theworld-the basic state of Dasein. Our investigation set out to describe
Being-in-the-world, so that from the beginning we could secure an adequate phenomenological horizon as opposed to those inappropriate and
mostly inexplicit ways in which the nature ofDasein has been determined
beforehand ontologically. Being-in-the-world was first characterized with
regard to the phenomenon of the world. And in our explication this was
done by characterizing ontico-ontologically what is ready-to-hand and
present-at-hand 'in' the environment, and then bringing within-theworld-ness into relief, so that by this the phenomenon of worldhood in
general could be made visible. But understanding belongs essentially to

334

335

384
Being and Time
II.4
disclosedness; and the structure of worldhood, significance, turned out to
be bound up with that upon which understanding projects itself-namely
that potentiality-for-Beingjor the sake of which Dasein exists.
The temporal Interpretation of everyday Dasein must start with those
structures in which disclosedness constitutes itself: understanding, stateof-mind, falling, and discourse. The modes in which temporality temporalizes are to be laid bare with regard to these phenomena, and will
give us a basis for defining the temporality of Being-in-the-world. This
leads us back to the phenomenon of the world, and permits us to delimit
the specifically temporal problematic of worldhood. This must be confirmed by characterizing that kind of Being-in-the-world which in an
everyday manner is closest to us--circumspective, falling concern. The
temporality of this concern makes it possible for circumspection to be
modified into a perceiving which looks at things, and the theoretical
cognition which is grounded in such perceiving. The temporality of
Being-in-the-world thus emerges, and it turns out, at the same time, to
be the foundation for that spatiality which is specific for Dasein. We must
also show the temporal Constitution of deseverance and directionality.
Taken as a whole, these analyses will reveal a possibility for the temporalizing of temporality in which Dasein's inauthenticity is ontologically
grounded; and they willlead us face to face with the question of how the
temporal character of everydayness-the temporal meaning of the phrase
'proximally and for the most part', which we have been using constantly
hitherto-is to be understood. By fixing upon this problem we shall have
made it plain that the clarification of this phenomenon which we have so
far attained is insufficient, and we shall have shown the extent of this
insufficiency.
The present chapter is thus divided up as follows: the temporality of
disclosedness in general (Section 68); the temporality of Being-in-theworld and the problem of transcendence (Section 69); the temporality
of the spatiality characteristic of Dasein (Section 70); the temporal
meaning of Dasein's everydayness (Section 71).
li[ 68. The Temporality of Disclosedness in General
Resoluteness, which we have characterized with regard to its
temporal meaning, represents an authentic disclosedness of Dasein-a
disclosedness which constitutes an entity of such a kind that in existing,
it can be its very 'there'. Care has been characterized with regard to its
temporal meaning, but only in its basic features. To exhibit its concrete
temporal Constitution, means to give a temporal Interpretation of the
itemsofitsstructure, taking them eachsingly: understanding, state-of-mind,

11·4
Being and Time
385
falling, and discourse. Every understanding has its mood. Every stateof-mind is one in which one understands. The understanding which
one has in such a state-of-mind has the character of falling. The understanding which has its mood attuned in falling, Articulates itself with
relation to its intelligibility in discourse. The current temporal Constitution of these phenomena leads back in each case to that one kind of
temporality which serves as such to guarantee the possibility that understanding, state-of-mind, falling, and discourse, are united in their structure. l
(a) The Temporality of UnderstandingU
With the term "understanding" we have in mind a fundamental
existentiale, which is neither a definite species of cognition distinguished, let
us say, from explaining and conceiving, nor any cognition at aU in the
sense of grasping something thematicaIly. Understanding constitutes
rather the Being of the "there" in such a way that, on the basis of such
understanding, a Dasein can, in existing, develop the different possibilities
of sight, of looking around [Sichumsehens], and of just looking. In aU
explanation one uncovers understandingly that which one cannot understand; and aIl explanation is thus rooted in Dasein's primary understanding.
If the term "understanding" is taken in. a way which is primordiaUy
existential, it means to be projecting 2 towards a potentiality-for-Being jor the
sake of which any Dasein exists. In understanding, one's own potentialityfor-Being is disclosed in such a way that one's Dasein always knows
understandingly what it is capable of. It 'knows' this, however, not by
having discovered some fact, but by maintaining itself in an existentiell
possibility. The kind of ignorance which corresponds to this, does not
consist in an absence or cessation of understanding, but must be regarded
as a deficient mode of the projectedness of one's potentiality-for-Being.
Existence can be questionable. If it is to be possible for something 'to be
in question' [das "In-Frage-stehen"], a disclosedness is needed. When one
understands oneself projectively in an existentiell possibility, the future
underlies this understanding, and it 'does so às a coming-towards-oneself
out of that current possibility as which one's Dasein exists. The future
makes ontologically possible an entity which is in such a way that it
exists understandingly in its potentiality-for-Being. Projection is basically
futural; it does not primarily grasp the projected possibility thematically
l'Die jeweilige zeitliche Konstitution der genannten Phanomene führt je auf die eine
Zeitlichkeit zurück, aIs welche sie die mëgliche Struktureinheit von Verstehen, Befindlichkeit, Verfal1en und Rede verbürgt.' The older editions omit the pronoun 'sie'.
2 ' ••• entwerfend-sein •. .' The older editions have ' ••• en twerfend Sein ••. '
N

33 6

337

386
Being and Time
II. 4
just by having it in view, but it throws itself into it as a possibility. In
each case Dasein is understandingly in the way that it can be. 1 Resoluteness has tumed out to be a kind of existing which is primordial and
authentic. Proximally and for the Most part, to be sure, Dasein remains
irresolute; that is to say, it remains closed off in its ownmost potentialityfor-Being, to which it brings itself only when it has been individualized.
This implies that temporality does not temporalize itself constantly out
of the authentic future. This inconstancy, however, does not Mean that
temporality sometimes lacks a future, but rather that the temporalizing
of the future takes various forms.
To designate the authentic future terminologically we have reserved
the expression "anticipation". This indicates that Dasein, existing authentically, lets itself come towards itself as its ownmost potentiality-for-Beingthat the future itselfmust first win itself, not from a Present, but from the
inauthentic future. If we are to provide a formally undifferentiated term
for the future, we may use the one with which we have designated the first
structural item of care-the "aluad-of-itself". Factically, Dasein is
constantly ahead of itself, but inconstantly anticipatory with regard to its
existentiell possibility.
How is the inauthentic future to be contrasted with this? Just as the
authentic future is revealed in resoluteness, the inauthentic future, as an
ecstatical mode, can reveal itselfonly if we go back ontologically from the
inauthentic understanding of everyday concem to its existential-temporal
meaning. As care, Dasein is essentially ahead of itself. Proximally and for
the Most part, concernful Being-in-the-world understands itself in terms
of that with which it is concemed. lnauthentic understanding 2 projects
itself upon that with which one can concem oneself, or upon what is
feasible, urgent, or indispensable in our everyday business. But that with
which we concem ourselves is as it is for the sake of that potentiality-forBeing which cares. This potentiality lets Dasein come towards itself in its
concernful Being-alongside that with which it is concemed. Dasein does
not come towards itselfprimarily in its ownmost non-relational potentiality-for-Being, but it awaits this concernfully in terms of that which yields or
denies the object of its concern. 3 Dasein comes towards itself from that with
which it concems itself. The inauthentic future has the character of
awaiting. 4o One's concernful understanding of oneself as they-self in terms
ist

l 'Verstehend
das Dasein je, wie es sein kann.'
li 'Das uneigentliche VeTstehen •• .' !talies only in the later editions.

~ '•.. sondem es ist besorgend seiner gewiùtig aus dem, was fias Besorgte eTgibt oder veTsagt.'
1t lS not clear whether 'das Besorgte' or 'was' is the subject ofits clause.
4' ••. des Gewiirtigens.' While the verb 'await' has many advantages as an approximation
to 'gewartigen', it is a bit too colourless and fails 10 bring out the important idea of being
prepared to reckon with that which one awaits.

Il. 4
Bezng and Time
387
of what one does, has its possibility 'based' upon this ecstatical mode 01
the future. And onry because factical Dasein is thus awaiting its potentialityfor-Being, and is awaiting this potentiality in terms of that with which it
concerns itself, can it expect anything and wait for it [erwarten und warten
auf ...]. In each case some sort of awaiting must have disclosed the
horizon and the range from which something can be expected. Expecting
is founded upon awaiting, and is a mode of that future which temporali;:;es itself
authenticalry as anticipation. Hence there lies in anticipation a more primordial Being-towards-death than in the concernful expecting of it.
Understanding, as existing in the potentiality-for-Being, however it
MaY have been projected, is primariry futural. But it would not temporalize
itselfifit were not temporal-that is, determined with equal primordiality
by having been and by the Present. The way in which the latter ecstasis
helps constitute inauthentic understanding, has already been made plain
in a rough and ready fashion. Everyday concem understands itself in
terms of that potentiality-for-Being which confronts it as coming from its
possible success or failure with regard to whatever its object ofconcem May
be. Corresponding to the inauthentic future (awaiting), there is a special
way of Being-alongside the things with which one concerns oneself. This
way of Being-alongside is the Present-the "waiting-towards";1 this
ecstatical mode reveals itself if we adduce for comparison this very same
ecstasis, but in the mode of authentic temporality. To the anticipation
which goes with resoluteness, there belongs a Present in accordance with
which a resolution discloses the Situation. In resoluteness, the Present is
not only brought back from distraction with the objects of one's closest
concem, but it gets held in the future and in having been. That Present
which is held in authentic temporality and which thus is authentic itself, we
call the "moment of vision". 2 This term must be understood in the active
sense as an ecstasis. It means the resolute rapture with which Dasein is
carried away to whatever possibilities and circumstances are encountered
in the Situation as possible objects of concem, but a rapture whieh is held
in resoluteness. 3 The moment of vision is a phenomenon which in principle
l 'Gegen-wart'. In this context it seems weil to translate this expression by a hendiadys
which, like Heidegger's hyphenation, calls attention to the root-meaning of the noun
'Gegenwart'. See our notes 2, p. 47, (H. 25) and 2, p. 48 (H. 26) above.
Z Cf. note 2, p. 376, H. 328 above.
a 'Er meint die entschlossene, aber in der Erschlossenheit gehaltene Entrückung des
Daseins an das, was in der Situation an besorgbaren Moglichkeiten, Umstiinden begegnet.'
The verb 'entrücken' means literally 'to move away' or 'to carry away', but it has also
taken on the meaning of the 'rapture' in which one is 'carried away' in a more figurative
sense. While the words 'Entrückung' and 'Ekstase' can thus he used in many contexts as
synonyms, for Heidegger the former seems the more general. (See H. 365 below.) Wc
shall translate 'entrücken' by 'rapture' or 'carry away', or, as in this case, by a combination of these expressions.

338

388

Being and Time
II. 4
can not be clarified in terms of the "now" [dem Jetzt]. The "now" is a
temporal phenomenon which belongs to time as within-time-ness: the
"now" 'in which' something arises, passes away, or is present-at-hand.
'In the moment of vision' nothing can occur; but as an authentic
Present or waiting-towards, the moment of vision permits us to encounter
for the first time what can be 'in a time' as ready-to-hand or present-athand. U1
In contradistinction to the moment of vision as the authentic Present,
we caU the inauthentic Present "making present". Formally understood,
every Present is one which makes present, but not every Present has the
character of a 'moment of vision'. When we use the expression "making
present" without adding anything further, we always have in mind the
inauthentic kind, which is irresolute and does not have the character of
a moment of vision. Making-present will become clear only in the light of
the temporal Interpretation of falling into the 'world' of one's concem;
such falling has its existential meaning in making present. But in so far as
the potentiality-for-Being which is projected by inauthentic understanding
is projected in terms of things with which one can be concemed, this
means that such understanding temporalizes itself in terms of making
present. The moment of vision, however, temporalizes itself in quite the
opposite manner-in terms of the authentic future.
Inauthentic understanding temporalizes itself as an awaiting which
makes present [gegenwartigendes Gewartigen]-anawaiting towhose ecsta339 tical unity there must belong a corresponding "having been". The authentic
coming-towards-itself of anticipatory resoluteness is at the same time a
coming-back to one's ownmost Self, which has been thrown into its individualization. This ecstasis makes it possible for Dasein to beabletotakeover
resolutely that entity which it already is. In anticipating, Dasein brings
itself againforth into its ownmost potentiality-for-Being. If Being-as-havingbeen is authentic, we call it "repetition".1 But when one projects oneself
inauthentically towards those possibilities which have been drawn from
the object of concem in making it present, this is possible only because
Dasein has forgotten itself in its ownmost thrown potentiality-for-Being.
This forgetting is not nothing, nor is it just a failure to remember; it is
rather a 'positive' ecstatical mode of one's having been-a mode with
a character of its own. The ecstasis (rapture) of forgetting has the character ofbacking away in theface ofone's ownmost "been", and ofdoing so
in a manner which is closed offfrom itself-in such a manner, indeed, that
this backing-away closes off ecstatically that in the face of which one is
l'lm Vorlaufen hoit sich das Dasein wietler in das eigenste Seinkonnen vor. Das eigentliche Gewesen-sein nennen wir die Wietlerholung.' On 'Wiederholung', see H. 385 and our
note ad loc.

II.4
Being and Time
389
1
backing away, and thereby closes itself off too. Baving forgotten [Vergessenheit] as an inauthentic way ofhaving been, is thus related to that thrown
Being which is one's own; it is the temporal meaning of that Being in
accordance with whieh 1 am proximally and for the most part as-havingbeen. Only on the basis of such forgetting can anything be retained [behalten] by the concernful making-present which awaits; and what are thus
retained are entities encountered within-the-world with a character other
than that of Dasein. To such retaining there corresponds a non-retaining
which presents us with a kind of'forgetting' in a derivative sense.
Just as expecting is possible only on the basis of awaiting, remembering is
possible only on that offorgetting, and not vice versa; for in the mode of
having-forgotten, one's having been 'discloses' primarily the horizon
into which a Dasein lost in the 'superficiality' of its object of concem, can
bring itselfby remembering. 2 The awaiting whichforgets and makes present is
an ecstatical unity in its own right, in accordance with which inauthentic
understanding temporalizes itself with regard to its temporality. The
unity ofthese ecstases closes off one's authentic potentiality-for-Being, and
is thus the existential condition for the possibility ofirresoluteness. Though
inauthentic concernful understanding determines itself in the light of
making present the object of concem, the temporalizing of the understanding is performed primarily in the future.
(b) The Temporality of State-oJ-mindiv
Understanding is never free-floating, but always goes with sorne stateof-mind. The "there" gets equiprimordially disclosed by one's mood in
every case--or gets closed off by it. Having a mood brings Daseinface to
facewith its thrownness insucha manner that this thrownness is not known
as such but disclosed far more primordially in 'how one is'. Existentially,
"Being-thrown" means finding oneself in sorne state-of-mind or other.
One's state-of-mind is therefore based upon thrownness. My mood
represents whatever may be the way in which 1 am primarily the entity
l'Die Ekstase (Entrückung) des Vergessens hat den Charakter des sich selbst verschlossenen Ausrückens vor dem eigensten Gewesen, so zwar, dass dieses Ausrücken vor ..•
ekstatisch das Wover verschliesst und in eins damit sich selbst.' Heidegger is here connecting the word 'Entrückung' (our 'rapture') with the cognate verb 'ausrücken' ('back
away'), which may be used intransitively in the military sense of 'decamping', but may
also be used transitively in the sense of 'disconnecting'. Both 'entrücken' and 'ausrücken'
mean originally 'to move away', but they have taken on very different connotations in
ordinary German usage.
Il ' ••• denn im Modus der Vergessenheit "erschliesst" die Gewesenheit primar den
Horizont, in den hinein das an die "Àusserlichkeit" des Besorgten verlorene Dasein sich
erinnem kann.' Here there is presumably a deliberate contrast between the idea of
externality in the root meaning of 'ÀUS!"erlichkeit' ('superficiality') and the idea of putting
oneself into something, which is the original sense of 'sich erinnem' ('to remember'). We
h~ve tried to, bring this out by our rather free translation of'... in den hinein ... sich
ermnem ...•

340

390
Being and Time
11·4
that has been thrown. How does the temporal Constitution of having-amood let itself be made visible? How will the ecstatical unity of one's
current temporality give any insight into the existential connection
between one's state-of-mind and one's understanding?
One's mood discloses in the rnanner of turning thither or turning away
from one's own Dasein. Bringing Daseinface to face with the "that-it-is" of
its own thrownness-whether authentically revealing it or inauthentically
covering it up-becomes existentially possible ooly if Dasein's Being, by
its very meaning, constantly is as having been. The "been" is not what
first brings one face to face with the thrown entity which one is oneself;
but the ecstasis of the "been" is what first makes it possible to find oneself
in the way of having a state-of-mind. 1
Understanding is grounded primarily in the future; one's state-oJ-mind,
however, temporalizes itself primarily in having been. B Moods temporalize
themselves-that is, their specific ecstasis belongs to a future and a Present
in such a way, indeed, that these equiprimordial ecstases are modified by
having been.
We have emphasized that while moods, of course, are ontically welIknown to us [bekannt], they are not recognized [erkannt] in their
primordial existential function. They are regarded as fleeting Experiences
which 'colour' one's whole 'psychical condition'. Anything which is
observed to have the character of turning up and disappearing in a
fleeting manner, belongs to the primordial constancy of existence. But
all the same, what should moods have in common with 'time' ? That these
'Experiences' come and go, that they run their course 'in time', is a trivial
thing to establish. Certainly. And indeed this can be established in an
ontico-psychological manner. Our task, however, is to exhibit the ontological structure ofhaving-a-mood in its existential-temporal Constitution.
And ofcourse this is proximally just a matter of first rnaking the temporality of moods visible. The thesis that 'one's state-of-mind is grounded
primarily in having been' means that the existentially basic character
ofmoods lies in bringing one back to something. This bringing-back does not
first produce a having been; but in anystate-of-mind some mode ofhaving
been is made manifest for existential analysis. 8 So if we are to Interpret
l 'Das Bringen vor das geworfene Seiende, das ~ selbst ist,. schafft 1Ù:cht erst ,das
Gewesen sondem dessen Ekstase ennoglicht erst das Slch-finden ID der WelSe des Slchbefinde~.' We have construed 'das Gewesen' and 'dessen Ekstase' as the subjects oftheir
respective clauses, but other interpretations are not impossible.
li In our italicization we follow the older editions. In the newer editions 'Gewesenheit'
('having been') is not italicized.
a 'Dieses atellt die Gewesenheit nicht erst her, sondem die Befindlichkeit offenbart fUr
die existenziale Analyse je einen Modus der Gewesenheit.' The grammar of the first
clause is ambiguous.

II.4
Being and Time
391
states-of-mind temporalIy, our aim is not one of deducing moods from
temporality and dissolving them into pure phenomena of temporalizing. 34 1
AH we have to do is to demonstrate that except on the basis of temporality,
moods are not possible in what they 'signify' in an existentiell way or in how
they 'signify' it. Our temporal Interpretation will restrict itself to the
phenomena of fear and anxiety, which we have already analysed in a
preparatory manner.
We shall begin our analysis byexhibiting the temporality offear. v Fear
bas been characterized as an inauthentic state-of-mind. To what extent
does the existential meaning which makes such a state-of-mind possible
lie in what has been? Which mode of this ecstasis designates the specifie
temporality offear? Fear is a fearing in theface ofsomething threateningof something which is detrimental to Dasein's factical potentiality-forBeing, and which brings itself close in the way we have described, within
the range of the ready-to-hand and the present-at-hand with which we
concem ourselves. Fearing discloses something threatening, and it does
so by way of everyday circumspection. A subject which merely beholds
would never be able to discover anything of the sort. But if something is
disclosed when one fears in the face of it, is not this disclosure a lettingsomething-come-towards-oneself [ein Auf-sich-zukommeolassen]? Has
not "fear" been rightly defined as "the expectation of sorne oncoming
evil" [eines ankommenden übels] ("malumfuturum")? Is not the primary
meaning offear the future, and least of aH, one's having been? Not ooly
does fearing 'relate' itself to 'something future' in the signification of
something which first cornes on 'in time'; but this self-relating is itself
futural in the primordially temporal sense. AlI this is incontestable.
Manifestly an awaiting is one of the things that belong to the existentialtemporal Constitution of fear. But proximally this just means that the
temporality of fear is one that is inauthentic. Is fearing in the face of something merely an expecting of something threatening which is coming on?
Such an expectation need not be fear already, and it is so far from being
fear that the specifie character which fear as a mood possesses is
missing. This character lies in the fact that in fear the awaiting lets what is
threatening come back [zurückkommen] to one's factically concemful
potentiality-for-Being. Ooly if that to which this cornes back is already
ecstatically open, can that which threatens be awaited right back to the
entity which 1 myself am; ooly so can my Dasein be threatened. 1 The
awaiting which fears is one which is afraid 'for itself'; that is to
say, fearing in the face of something, is in each case a fearing about;
l 'Zurück aui das Seiende, das ich bin, kann das Bedrohliche nur gewartigt, und so das
Dasein bedroht werden, wenn das Woraufdes Zurück auf ... sehon überhaupt ekstatisch
offen ist.'

34 2

392
Being and Time
II. 4
therein lies the character offear as mood and as affect. When one's Beingin-thc-world has been threatened and it concerns itselfwith the ready-tohand, it does so as a factical potentiality-for-Being of its own. In the face
of this potentiality one backs away in bewilderment, and this kind of
forgetting oneself is what constitutes the existential-temporal meaning of
fear. l Aristotle rightly defines "fear" as ÀV1T7J 'TL!) ~ 'Tapax~-as "a kind
of depression or bewilderment".vl This depression forces Dasein back to
its thrownness, but in such a way that this thrownness gets quite closed off.
The bewilderment is based upon a forgetting. When one forgets and backs
away in the face of a factical potentiality-for-Being which is resolute, one
clings to those possibilities of self-preservation and evasion which one has
already discovered circumspectively beforehand. When concern is afraid,
it leaps from next to next, because it forgets itself and therefore does not
take hold of any definite possibility. Every 'possible' possibility offers itself,
and this means that the impossible ones do so too. The man who fears,
does not stop with any of these; his 'environment' does not disappear, but
it is encountered without his knowing his way about in it any longer. 2
This bewildered making-present of the first thing that cornes into one's head,
is something that belongs with forgetting oneselfin fear. It is well known,
for instance, that the inhabitants of a burning house will often 'save' the
most indifferent things that are most closely ready-to-hand. When one has
forgotten oneself and makes present a jumble of hovering possibilities, one
thus makes possible that bewilderment which goes to make up the moodcharacter offear. 3 The having forgotten which goes with such bewilderment modifies the awaiting too and gives it the character of a depressed
or bewildered awaiting which is distinct from any pure expectation.
The specifie ecstatical unity which makes it existentially possible to be
afraid, temporalizes itselfprimarily out of the kind offorgetting characterized above, which, as a mode of having been, modifies its Present and
its future in their own temporalizing. The temporality offear is a forgetting
which awaits and makes present. The common-sense interpretation of
fear, taking its orientation from what we encounter within-the-world,
seeks in the fust instance to designate the 'oncoming evil' as that
in the face of which we fear, and, correspondingly, to define our
relation to this evil as one of "expecting". Anything else which
l 'Deren existenziai-zeitlicher Sinn wird konstituiert durch ein Sichvergessen: das
verwirrte Ausrücken vor dem eigenen faktischen Seinkënnen, ais welches das bedrohte
In-der-Welt-sein das Zuhandene besorgt.'
2 'Bei keiner hait der Fürchtende, die "UmweIt" verschwindet nicht, sondern begegnet
in einem Sich-nicht-mehr-auskennen in ih,.'
3 'Das selbstvergessene Gegenwartigen eines Gewirrs von schwebenden Moglichkeiten
ermoglicht die Verwirrung, ais welche sie den Stimmungscharakter der Furcht ausmacht.'
The pronoun 'sie' does not appear in the oider editions.

II. 4

Being and Time
393
belongs to the phenomenon remains a 'feeling of pleasure or displeasure'.
How is the temporality of anxiery related to that offear? We have called
the phenomenon of anxiety a basic state-of-mind.vu Anxiety brings
Dasein face to face with its ownmost Being-thrown and reveals the uncanniness of everyday familiar Being-in-the-world. Anxiety, like fear, has its
character formally determined by something in the face of which one is
anxious and something.about which one is anxious. But our analysis has
shown that these two phenomena coincide. This does not mean that their
structural characters are melted away into one another, as if anxiety were
anxious neither in the face ofanything nor about anything. Their coinciding means rather that the entity by which both these structures are filled
in [das sie erfüllende Seiende] is the same-namely Dasein. In particular,
that in the face of which one has anxiety is not encountered as something
definite with which one can concern oneself; the threatening does not
come from what is ready-to-hand or present-at-hand, but rather from the
fact that neither of these 'says' anything any longer. Environmental
entities no longer have any involvement. The world in which 1 exist has
sunk into insignificance; and the world which is thus disclosed is one in
which entities can be freed only in the character ofhaving no involvement.
Anxiety is anxious in the face of the "nothing" of the world; but this does
not mean that in anxiety we experience something like the absence of
what is prese.nt-at-hand within-the-world. The present-at-hand must be
encountered in just such a way that it does not have any involvement
whatsoever, but can show itself in an empty mercilessness. This implies,
however, that our concernful awaiting finds nothing in terms ofwhich it
might be able to understand itself; it clutches at the "nothing" of the
world; but when our understanding has come up against the world, it is
brought to Being-in-the-world as such through anxiety. Being-in-the
world, however, is. both what anxiety is anxious in-the-face-of and what
it is anxious about. To be anxious in-the-face-of . . . does not have the
character of an expecting or of any kind of awaiting. That in-the-face-of
which one has anxiety is indeed already 'there'-namely, Dasein itself.
In that case, does not anxiety get constituted by a future? Certainly;
but not by the inauthentic future ofawaiting.
Anxiety discloses an insignificance of the world; and this insignificance
reveals the nullity of that with which one can concern oneself-or, in
other words, the impossibility of projecting oneself upon a potentialityfor-Being which belongs to existence and which is founded primarily
upon one's objects ofconcern. The revealing ofthis impossibility, however,
signifies that one is letting the possibility of an authentic potentiality-forBeing be lit up. What is the temporal meaning ofthis revealing? Anxiety

343

344

394
Being and Time
II.4
is anxious about naked Dasein as something that has been thrown into
uncanniness. It brings one back to the pure "that-it-is" of one's ownmost
individualized thrownness. This bringing-back has neither the character
of an evasive forgetting nor that of a remembering. But just as little does
anxiety imply that one has already taken over one's existence into one's
resolution and done so by a repeating. On the contrary, anxiety brings
one back to one's thrownness as something possible which can be repeated.
And in this way it also reveals the possibility of an authentic potentialityfor-Being-a potentiality which must, in repeating, come back to its
thrown "there", but come back as something future which comes towards
[zukünftiges]. The character of having been is constitutive ftr the state-ofmind of anxiery j and bringing one face ta face with repeatabiliry is the specifie
ecstatical mode ofthis character.
The forgetting which is constitutive for fear, bewilders Dasein and lets
it drift back and forth between 'worldly' possibilities which it has not seized
upon. In contrast to tOO making-present which is not held on to, the Present of anxiety is heid on ta when one brings oneself back to one's ownmost
thrownness. The existential meaning of anxiety is such that it cannot lose
itself in something with which it might be concerned. If anything like
this happens in a similar state-of-mind, tOO is fear, which the everyday
understanding confuses with anxiety. But even though the Present of
anxiety is held on ta, it does not as yet have the character of the moment of
vision, which temporalizes itself in a resolution. Anxiety merely brings
one into the mood for a possible resolution. The Present of anxiety holds
the moment of vision at the ready [alif dem Sprung]; as such a moment it
itself, and only itself, is possible.
The temporality of anxiety is peculiar; for anxiety is grounded pdmordially in having been, and only out of this do the future and the Present
temporalize themselves; in this peculiar temporality is demonstrated the
possibility of that power which is distinctive for the mood of anxiety. In
this, Dasein is taken all the way back to its naked uncanniness, and becomes
fascinated byit. 1 This fascination, however, not only takes Dasein back from
its 'worldly' possibilities, but at the same time gives it the possibility of an
authentic potentiality-for-Being.
l'An der eigentümlichen Zeitlichkeit der Angst, dass sie ursprünglich in der Gewesenheit gründet und aus ihr erst Zukunft und Gegenwart sich zeitigen, erweist sich die
Mogichkeit der Machtigkeit, durch die sich die Stimmung der Angst auszeichnet. In ihr
ist das Dasein vollig auf seine nackte Unheimlichkeit zurückgenommen und von ihr benommen.' In these two sentences there are no less than six feminine nouns which might
serve as the antecedents of the pronouns 'sie' and 'ihr' in their severa! appearances. We
have chosen the interpretation which seems most plausible to us, but others are perhaps
no less defensible. The etymological connection between 'zurückgenommen' ('taken ...
back') and 'benommen' ('fascinated') does not show up in the English version; it is
obviously deliberate, and it gets followed up in the next sentence.

Il. 4

Being and Time
395
Yet neither ofthese moods, fear and anxiety,.ever 'occurs' just isolated
in the 'stream of Experiences' ; each of them determines an understanding
or determines itself in terms of one. 1 Fear is occasioned by entities with
which we concern ourselves environmentally. Anxiety, however, springs
from Dasein itself. When fear assails us, it does so from what is withinthe-world. Anxiety arises out of Being-in-the-world as thrown Beingtowards-death. When understood temporally, tOO 'mounting' of anxiety
out ofDasein, means that the future and the Present ofanxiety temporalize
themselves out of a primordial Being-as-having-been in the sense of
bringing us back to repeatability. But anxiety can mount authentically
only in a Dasein which is resolute. He who is resolute knows no fear;
but he understands the possibility of anxiety as the possibility of the very
mood which neither inhibits nor bewilders him. Anxiety liberates him
jrom possibilities which 'count for nothing' ["nichtigen"], and lets him
become free for those which are authentic. -)
Although both fear and anxiety, as modes ofstate-of-mind, are grounded
primarily in having been, they each have different sources with regard to
their own temporalization in the temporality ofcare. Anxiety springs from
thefuture ofresoluteness, while fear springs from the lost Present, ofwhich
fear is fearfully apprehensive, so that it falls prey to it more than ever. 2
But may not the thesis of the temporality of moods hold only for those
phenomena which we have selected for our analysis? How is a temporal
meaning to be found in the pallid lack ofmood which dominates the 'grey
everyday' through and through? And how about the tempc;>rality of such
moods and affects as hope, joy, enthusiasm, gaiety? Not only fear and
anxiety, but other moods, are founded existentially upon one's having been; this becomes plain if we merely mention such phenomena as
satiety, sadness, melancholy, and desperation.. Of course these must be
Interpreted on the broader basis of an existential analytic of Dasein that
has been well worked out. But even a phenomenon like hope, which seems
to be founded wholly upon the future, must be analysed in much the same
way as fear. Hope has sometimes been characterized as the expectation
of a bonum futurum, to distinguish it from fear, which relates itself to a
malumfuturum. But what is decisive for the structure of hope as a phenomenon,is not so much the 'futural' character ofthat ta which it relates itself
l 'Beide Stimmungen, Furcht und Angst, "kommen" jedoch nie nur isoliert "vor" im
"Eriebnisstrom", sondem be-stimmen je ein Verstehen, bzw. sich aus einem solchen.'
Heidegger writes 'be-stimmen' with a hyphen to cali attention to the fact that the words
'bestimmen' ('determine') and 'Stimmung' ('mood') have a co~on ~tem.
Il 'Die Angst entspringt aus der Zukunft der Entschlossenhelt, die Furcht aus der
verlorenen Gegenwart, die furchtsam die Furcht befiirchtet, um ihr so erst recht zu
verfallen.' The grammar of this passage is ambiguous, and would also permit us to write:
'.•• the lost Present, which is fearfully apprehensive offear, so that .. .'

345

396
Being and Time
II. 4
but rather the existential meaning of Iwping itselj. Even here its character
as a mood lies primarily in hoping as Iwping for something for oneself [Fürsich-erlwifen]. He who hopes takes himself with him into his hope, as it were,
and brings himselfup against what he hopes for. But this presupposes that
he has somehow arrived at himself. To say that hope brings alleviation
[erleichtert] from depressing misgivings, means merely that even hope, as
a state-of-mind, is still related tO' our burdens, and related in the mode of
Being-as-having been. Such a mood of elation-or better, one which
elates-is ontologically possible only if Dasein has an ecstatico-temporal
relation to the thrown ground of itself.
Furthermore, the pallid lack of mood-indifference-which is addicted
to nothing and has no urge for anything, and which abandons itself to
whatever the day may bring, yet in so doing takes everything along with
it in a certain manner, demonstrates most penetratingly the power of forgetting in the everyday mode of that concem which is closest to us.
Just living along [Das Dahinleben] in a way which 'lets' everything 'be'
as it is, is based on forgetting and abandoning oneselfto one's thrownness.
It has the ecstatical meaning of an inauthentic way of having been.
Indifference, which can go along with busying oneself head over heeIs,
must be sharply distinguished from equanimity. This latter mood springs
from resoluteness, which, in a moment of vision, looks at 1 those Situations
which are possible in one's potentiality-for-Being-a-whole as disclosed in
our anticipation of [zum] death.
Only an entity which, in accordance with the meaning ofits Being, finds
itself in a state-of-mind [sich befindet]-that is to say, an entity, which
in existing, is as aIready having been, and which exists in a constant mode
of what has been-ean become affected. Ontologically such affection
presupposes making-present, and indeed in such a manner that in this
making-present Dasein can be brought back to itself as something that
has been. It remains a problem in itself to define ontologically the way
in which the senses can be stimufated or touched in something that merely
has life, and how and where 2 the Being of animaIs, for instance, is constituted by some kind of 'time'.
(c) The Temporality ofFallingv1U
In our temporal Interpretation of understanding and state-of-mind,
we not only have come up against a primary ecstasis for each of these
phenomena, but at the same time' we have always come up against temporality as a whole. Just as understanding is made possible primarily by
l '. • • die augenblicklich ist auf . . .'
Il ' ••• wie und wo .. .' The earlier editions have'.•• wie und ob .. .' ('.•. how and

whether •• .').

Il. 4

Being and Time
397
the future, and moods are made possible by having been, the third
constitutive item in the structure of care-namely, falling-has it8
existential meaning in the Present. Our preparatory analysis of falling
began with an Interpretation of idle talk, curiosity, and ambiguity.1X
In the temporal analysis of falling we shall take the same course. But
we shall restrict our investigation to a consideration of curiosity, for
here the specific temporality of falling is most easily seen. Our analysis
of idle ,talk and ambiguity, however, presupposes our having already
clarified the temporal Constitution of discourse and of explanation
(interpretation) .
Curiosity is a distinctive tendency ofDasein's Being, in accordance with
which Dasein concerns itself with a potentiality-for-seeing.x Like the
concept of sight, 'seeing' will not be restricted to awareness through 'the
eyes of the body'. Awareness in the broader sense lets what is ready-tohand and what is present-at-hand be encountered 'bodily' in themselves
with regard to the way they look. Letting them be thus encountered is
grounded in a Present. This Present gives us in general the ecstatical
horizon within which entities can have bodily presence. Curiosity, however,
does not make present the present-at-hand in order to tarry alongside it
and understand it; it seeks to see only in order to see and to have seen. As
this making-present which gets entangled in itself, curiosity has an ecstatical unity with a corresponding future and a corresponding having
been. The craving for the new 1 is of course a way of proceeding towards
something not yet seen, but in such a manner that the making-present
seeks to extricate itself from awaiting. Curiosity is futural in a way
which is altogether inauthentic, and in such a manner, moreover, that
it does not await a possibility, but, in its craving, just desires such a possibility as something that is actual. Curiosity gets constituted by a makingpresent which is not held on to, but which, in merely making present,
thereby seeks constantly to run away from the awaiting in which it is
nevertheless 'held', though not held on to. 2 The Present 'arises or leaps
away' from the awaiting which belongs to it, and it does so in the sense
l 'Die Gier nach dem Neuen •. .' Here Heidegger calls attention to the etymological
structure of the word 'Neugier' ('curiosity').
Il 'Die Neugier wird konstituiert durch ein ungehaltenes Gegenwiirtigen, das, nur
gegenwiirtigend, damit stiindig dem Gewartigen, darin es doch ungehalten "gehalten"
ist, zu entlaufen sucht.' This sentence involves a playon the words 'Gewiirtigen' and
'Gegenwartigen', 'gehalten' and 'ungehalten', which is not easily reproduced. While
'ungehalten' can mean 'not held on ta' (as we have often translated it), it can also mean
that one can no longer 'contain' oneself, and becomes 'indignant' or 'angry'. In the present
passage, Heidegger may well have more than one meaning in mind. The point would be
that in curiosity we are kept (or 'held') awaiting 50mething which we 'make present' to
ourselves so vividly that we try to go beyond the mere awaiting ofit and become irritated
or indignant because we are unable to do 50. 50 while we are 'held' in our awaiting, we
do not 'hold on ta it'.

347

398
Being and Time
II. 4
1
of running away from it, as we havejust emphasized. But the makingpresent which 'leaps away' in curiosity is so little devoted to the 'thing'
it is curious about, that when it obtains sight of anything it already
looks away to what is coming next. The making-present which 'arises or
leaps away' from the awaiting of a definite possibility which one has
taken hold of, makes possible ontologically that not-tarrying which is
distinctive of curiosity. The making-present does not 'leap away' from
the awaiting in such a manner, as it were, that it detaches itselffrom that
awaiting and abandons it to itself (ifwe understand this ontically). This
'leaping-away' is rather an ecstatical modification of awaiting, and of
such a kind that the awaiting leaps after the making-present. ll The awaiting
gives itself up, as it were; nor does it any longer let any inauthentic
possibilities of concem come towards it from that with which it concerns.
itself, unless these are possibilities only for a making-present which is
not held on to. When the awaiting is ecstatically modified by the makingpresent which leaps away, so that it becomes an awaiting which leaps
after, this modification is the existential-temporal condition for the
possibility of distraction.
Through the awaiting which leaps after, on the other hand, the makingpresent is abandoned more and more to itself. It makes present for the
sake of the Present. It thus entangles itself in itself, so that the distracted
not-tarrying becomes never-dwelling-anywhere. This latter mode of the
Present is the counter-phenomenon at the opposite extreme from the
moment of vision. In never dwelling anywhere, Being-there is everywhere
and nowhere. The moment of vision, however, brings existence into the
Situation and discloses the authentic 'there'.
The more inauthentically the Present is-that is, the more makingpresent cornes towards 'itself'-the more it flees in the face of a definite
potentiality-for-Being and closes it off; but in that case, all the less can
the future come back to the entity which has been thrown. In the 'leapingaway' of the Present, one also forgets increasingly. The fact that curiosity
always holds by what is coming next, and has forgotten what has gone
l'Die Gegenwart "entspringt" dem zugehorigen Gewartigen in dem betonten Sinne
des Entlaufens.' While the verb 'entspringen' can mean 'arise from' or 'spring from', as
it usually does in this work, it can also mean 'ron awayfrom' or 'escape from', as Heidegger says it does here. We shaH accordingly translate it in this context by the more literaI
'leap away' or occasionally by 'arise or leap away'. The point ofthis passage will perhaps
be somewhat plainer if one keeps in mind that when Heidegger speaks of the 'Present'
('Gegenwart') or 'making-present' ('Gegenwartigen') as 'leaping away', he is using these
nouns in the more literaI sense of 'waiting towards'. Thus in one's 'present' curiosity, one
'leaps away' from what one has been 'awaiting', and does so by 'waiting for' something
different.
.
2 ' • • • dass dieses dem Gegenwartigen nachspringt.' The idea seems to be that when
curiosity 'makes present' new possibilities, the current awaiting is re-directed towards
these instead of towards the possibilities which have been awaited hitherto.

Il. 4

Being and Time
399
before, l is not a result that ensues only from curiosity, but is the ontological
condition for curiosity itself.
As regards their temporal meaning, the characteristics of falling which
we have pointed out-temptation, tranquillization, alienation, selfentanglement-mean that the making-present which 'leaps away' has an
ecstatical tendency such that it seeks to temporalize itself out of itself.
When Dasein entangles itself, this has an ecstatical meaning. Of course
when one speaks of the rapture with which one's existence is carried away
in making present, this does not signify that Dasein detaches itself from
its Self and its "1". Even when it makes present in the most extreme
manner, it remains temporal-that is, awaiting and forgetful. In making
present, moreover, Dasein still understands itself, though it has been
alienated from its ownmost potentiality-for-Being, which is based primarily
on the authentic future and on authentically having been. But in so far
as making-present is always offering something 'new', it does not let
Dasein come back to itself and is constantly tranquillizing it anew. This
tranquillizing, however, strengthens in tum the tendency towards leaping
away. Curiosity is 'activated' not by the endless immensity of what we
have not yet seen, but rather by the falling kind of temporalizing which
belongs to the Present as it leaps away. Il Even if one has seen everything,
this is precisely when curiosity fabricates something new.
As a mode of temporalizing, the 'leaping-away' of the Present is
grounded in the essence of temporality, which is finite. Having been
thrown into Being-towards-death, Dasein flees-proximally and for the
most part-in the face of this thrownness, which has been more or less
explicitly revealed. The Present leaps away from its authentic future
and from its authentic having been, so that it lets Dasein come to
its authentic existence only by taking a detour through that Present.
The 'leaping-away' of the Present-that is, the falling into lostnesshas its source in that primordial authentic temporality itselfwhich makes
possible thrown Being-towards-death. 3
While Dasein can indeed be brought authentically face to face with its
thrownness, so as to understand itself in that thrownness authentically,
nevertheless, this thrownness remains closed off from Dasein as regards
the ontical "whence" and "how" of it. But the fact that it is thus closed
l ' .•. beim Nachsten haIt 'und das Vordem vergessen hat .. .'
2 'Nicht die endlose Unübersehbarkeit dessen, was noch nicht gesehen ist, "bewirkt"

die Neugier, sondem die verfa1lende Zeitigungsart der entspringenden Gegenwart.'
This sentence is grarnmatica1ly ambiguous.
3 'Der Ursprung des "Entspringens" der Gegenwart, das heisst des Verfa1lens in die
Verlorenheilt, ist die ursprüngliche, eigentliche Zeitlichkeit selbst, die das geworfene Sein
z.um Tode ermoglicht.' Our conventions for translating 'Ursprung' as 'source', 'ursprünghch' as 'primordial', and 'entspringen' as 'leap away', conceal Heidegger's exploitation
of the root 'spring-' in this passage.

348

Being and Time
II. 4
off is by no means just a kind of ignorance factually subsisting; it is constitutive for Dasein's facticity. It is also determinative for the ecstatical
character of the way existence has been abandoned to its own null basis.
ProximaIly, the "throw" ofDasein's Being-thrown into the world is one
that does not authenticaIly get "caught". The 'movement' which such a
"throw" implies does not come to 'a stop' because Dasein now ois there'.
Dasein gets dragged along in thrownness; that is to say, as something
which has been thrown into the world, it loses itself in the 'world' in its
factical submission to that with which it is to concern itself. The Present,
which makes up the existential meaning of "getting taken along", never
arrives at any other ecstatical horizon of its own accord, unless it gets
brought back from its lostness by a resolution, so that both the current
Situation and therewith the primordial 'limit-Situation' ofBeing-towardsdeath, will be disclosed as a moment of vision which has been held on to.
400

349

(d) The Temporality of Discoursexi
When the "there" has been completely disclosed, its disclosedness is
constituted by understanding state-of-mind, and falling; and this disclosedness becomes Articulated by discourse. Thus discourse does not
temporalize itself primarily in any definite ecstasis. FacticaIly, however,
discourse expresses itselffor the most part in language, and speaks proximally in the way of addressing itself to the 'environment' by talking about
things concernfuIly; because of this, making-present has, of course, a
privileged constitutive function.
Tenses, like the other temporal phenomena of language-'aspects' and
'temporal stages' ["Zeitstufen"]-do not spring from the fact that discourse expresses itself 'also' about 'temporal' processes, processes encountered 'in time'. Nor does their basis lie in the fact that speaking runs its
course 'in a psychical time'. Discourse in itself is temporal, since aIl
talking about ..., of ..., or to .•., is grounded in the ecstatical unity
of temporality. Aspects have their roots in the primordial temporalityof
concern, whether or not this concern relates itself to that which is within
time. The problem of their existential-temporal structure cannot even he
formulated with the help of the ordinary traditional conception of time, to
which the science oflanguage needs must have recourse. xii But because in
any discourse one is talking about entities, even if not primarily and
predominantly in the sense of theoretical assertion, the analysis of the
temporal Constitution of discourse and the explication of the temporal
characteristics of language-patterns can be tackled only if the problem of
how Being and truth are connected in principle, is broached in the light
of the problematic oftemporality. We can then define even the ontological

Il. 4

Being and Time
401
rneaning of the 'is', which a superficial theory of propositions and judgrnents has deformed to a mere 'copula'. Only in terms of the temporality
of discourse-that is, of Dasein in general-ean we clarify how 'signification' 'arises' and make the possibility of concept-formation ontologically
intelligible.xiii
Understanding is grounded primarily in the future (whether in anticipation or in awaiting). States-of-mind temporalize themselves primarily in
having been (whether in repetition or in having forgotten). Falling has its
temporal roots primarily in the Present (whether in making-present or in
the moment of vision). AlI the same, understanding is in every case a
Present which ois in the process of having been'. AIl the same, one's
state-of-mind temporalizes itself as a future which is 'making present'.
And aIl the same, the Present 'leaps away' from a future that is in the
process of having been, or else it is held on to by such a future. Thus we
can see that in every ecstasis, temporality temporalizes itself as a whole,. and this
means that in the ecstatical uniry with which temporaliry has fully temporalized
itselfcurrently, is grounded the totaliry of the structural whole of existence, facticiry,
andfaUing-that is, the uniry of the care-structure.
Temporalizing does not signify that ecstases come in a 'succession'.
The future is not later than having been, and having been is not earlier
than the Present. Temporality temporalizes itself as a future which makes
present in the process of having been.
Both the disclosedness of the "there" and Dasein's basic existentiell
possibilities, authenticity and inauthenticity, are founded upon temporality. But disclosedness always pertains with equal primordiality to the
entirety of Being-in-the-world-to Being-in as well as to the world. So if we
orient ourselves by the temporal Constitution of disclosedness, the ontological condition for the possibility that there can be entities which exist
as Being-in-the-world, must be something that may also be exhibited.
~ 69. The Temporality

of Being-in-the-world and the Prohlem of the Transcendence

of the World
The ecstatical unity of temporality-that is, the unity of the 'outsideof-itself' in the raptures of the future, ofwhat has been, and of the Present
-is the condition for the possibility that there can be an entity which
exists as its "there". The entity which bears the title "Being-there" is one
'that has been 'cleared'.xiv The light which constitutes this clearedness
[Gelicl>tetheit] of Dasein, is not something ontically present-at-hand as a
power or source for a radiant brightness occurring in the entity on occasion.
That by which this entity is essentially cleared-in other words, that
which makes it both 'open' for itself and 'bright' for itself-is what we

350

Being and Time
II. 4
have defined as "care", in advance of any 'temporal' Interpretation. In
care is grounded the full disc10sedness of the "there". Gnly by this
clearedness is any illuminating or illumining, any awareness, 'seeing', or
having of something, made possible. We understand the light of this
clearedness only if we are not seeking sorne power implanted in us and
present-at-hand, but are interrogating the whole constitution of Dasein'sBeing-name1y, care-and are interrogating it as to the unitary basis for
its existential possibility. Ecstatical temporality clears the "there" primordially.
It is what primarily regulates the possible unity of all Dasein's existential
structures.
Only through the fact that Being-there is rooted in temporality can we
get an insight into the existential possibility of that phenomenon which, at
the beginning of our analytic of Dasein, we have designated as its basic
state: Being-in-the-world. We had to assure ourse1ves in the beginning that
the structural unity of this phenomenon cannot be torn apart. The
question of the basis which makes the unity of this articulated structure
possible, remained in the background. With the aim of protecting this
phenomenon from those tendencies to split it up which were the most
obvious and therefore the most baleful, we gave a rather thorough Interpretation of that everyday mode of Being-in-the-world which is closest to
us-concernful Being alongside the ready-to-hand within-the-world. Now
that care itselfhas been defined ontologically and traced back to temporality as its existential ground, concern can in turn be conceived explicitly in
terms of either care or temporality.
In the first instance our analysis of the temporality of concern sticks to
the mode of having to do with the ready-to-hand circumspective1y. Our
analysis then pursues the existential-temporal possibility that circumspective concern may be modified into a discovering of entities withinthe-world in the sense of certain possibilities of scientific research, and
discovering them 'mere1y' by looking at them. Our Interpretation of the
temporality of Being alongside what is ready-to-hand and present-athand within-the-world-Being alongside circumspective1y as well as with
theoretical concern-shows us at the same time how this temporality is
already the advance condition for that possibility of Being-in-the-world
in which Being alongside entities within-the-world is grounded. Ifwe take
the temporal Constitution of Being-in-the-world as a theme for analysis,
we are led to the following questions: in what way is anything like a world
possible at aH? in what sense is the world ? what does the world transcend,
and how does it do so? how are 'independent' ["unabhangige"] entities
within-the-world 'connected' ["hangt" . . . "zusammen"] with the
transcending world? To expound these questions ontologically is not to
402

35 1

Il. 4
Being and Time
403
answer them. On the contrary, what such an exposition accomplishes is the
clarification ofthose structures with regard to which the problem of transcendence must be raised-a clarification which is necessary beforehand. In
the existential-temporal Interpretation of Being-in-the-world, three things
will be considered: (a) the temporality of circumspective concern; (b) the
temporal meaning of the way in which circumspective concern becomes
modified into theoretical knowledge of what is present-at-hand withinthe-world; (c) the temporal problem of the transcendence of the :vorld.
(a) The Temporali#J of Circumspective Concern
How are we to obtain the right point of view for analysing the temporality of concern? We have called concernful Being alongside the 'world'
our "dealings in and with the environment".ltV As phenomena which are
examples of Being alongside, we have chosen the using, manipulation,
and producing of the ready-to-hand, and the deficient and undifferentiated modes ofthese; that is, we have chosen ways of Being alongside
what be10ngs to one's everyday needs. ltVl In this kind of concern Dasein's
authentic existence too maintains itse1f, even when for such existence this
concern is 'a matter of indifference'. The ready-to-hand things with
which we concern ourselves are not the causes of our concern, as if this
were to arise only by the effects of entities within-the-world. Being alongside the ready-to-hand cannot be explained ontically in terms of the
ready-to-hand itself, nor can the ready-to-hand be derived contrariwise
from this kind ofBeing. But neither are concern, as a kind of Being which
be10ngs to Dasein, and that with which we concern ourse1ves, as something ready-to-hand within-the-world, just present-at-hand together. AlI the
same, a 'connection' subsists between them. That which is dealt with, if
rightly understood, sheds light upon concernful dealings themse1ves. And
furthermore, if we miss the phenomenal structure of what is dealt with,
then we fail to recognize the existential constitution of dealing. Of course
we have already made an essential gain for the analysis of those entities
which we encounter as elosest to us, if their specific character as equipment does not get passed over. But we must understand further that
concernful dealings never dwell with any individual item of equipment.
Our using and manipulating of any definite item of eq~ipment still
remains oriented towards sorne equipmental context. If, for lnstance, we
are searching for sorne equipment which we have 'misplaced', then what
we have in mind is not mere1y what we are searching for, or even primarily
this' nor do we have it in mind in an isolated 'act'; but the range of the
equipmental totality has already been discovered beforehand. Whenever
we 'go to work' and seize hold of something, we do not push out from the

35 2

353

404
Being and Time
II. 4
"nothing" and come upon some item of equipment which has been presented to us in isolation j in laying hold of an item of equipment, we come
back to it from whatever work-world has already been disclosed.
The upshot of this is that if in our analysis of dealings we aim at that
which is dealt with, then one's existent Being alongside the entities with
which one concerns oneself must be given an orientation not towards
some isolated item of equipment which is ready-to-hand, but towards
the equipmental totality. This way of taking what is dealt with, is forced
upon us also if we consider that character of Being which belongs distinctively to equipment that is ready-to-hand-namely, involvement. xvu
We understand the term "involvement" ontologically. The kind of talk in
which we say that something has with it an involvement in something, is
not meant to establish a fact ontically, but rather to indicate the kind of
Being that belongs to what is ready-to-hand. The relational character of
involvement-of its 'with ... in .. .'-suggests that "an" equipment is
ontologically impossible. Of course just a solitary item of equipment may
be ready-to-hand while another is missing. But this makes known to us
that the very thing that is ready-to-hand belongs to something else. Our
concernful dealings can let what is ready-to-hand be encountered circumspectively only if in these dealings we already understand something like
the involvement which something has in something. The Being-alongside
which discovers circumspectively in concern, amounts to letting something
be involved-that is, to projecting an involvement understandingly.
Letting things be involved makes up the existential structure of concern. But concern,
as Being alongside something, belongs to the essential constitution of care; and care,
in turn, is grounded in temporality. If aU this is so, then the existential condition of
the possibility of letting things be involved must be sought in a mode of the temporali;:;ing of temporality.
Letting something be involved is implied in the simplest handling of an
item of equipment. That which we let it be involved in [Das Wobei
desselben] has the character of a "towards-which"j with regard to this,
the equipment is either usable or in use. The understanding of the
"towards-which"-that is, the understanding of what the equipment is
involved in-has the temporal structure of awaiting. In awaiting the
"towards-which", concern can at the same time come back by itselfto the
sort ofthing in which it is involved. The awaiting ofwhat it is involved in,
and-together with this awaiting-the retaining of that which is thus
involved, make possible in its ecstatical unity the specifically manipulative
way in which equipment is made present. l
1 'Das Cewiirtigen des Wobei in eins mit dem Behalten des Womit der Bewandtnis
ennaglicht in seiner ekstatischen Einheit das spezifisch hantierende Gegenwiirtigen des
Zeugs.'

11.4
Being and Time
405
The awaiting of the "towards-which" is neither a considering of the
'goal' nor an expectation of the impendent finishing of the work to }le
produced. It has by no means the character of getting something thematica11y into one's grasp. Neither does the retaining of that which has an
involvement signify holding it fast thematically. Manipulative dealings
no more relate themselves merely to that in which we let something be
involved, than they do to what is involved itself. Letting something be
involved is constituted rather in the unity of a retention which awaits,
and it is constituted in such a manner, indeed, that the making-present
which arises from this, makes possible the characteristic absorption of
concem in its equipmental world. When one is wholly devoted to something and 'really' busies oneself with it, one does not do so just alongside
the work itself, or alongside the tool, or alongside both of them 'together'.
The unity of the relations in which concem circumspectively 'operates',
bas been established already by letting-things-be-involved-which is
based upon temporality.
A specific kind of forgetting is essential for the temporality that is con·
stitutive for letting something be involved. The Self must forget itself if,
lost in the world ofequipment, it is to be able 'actually' to go to work and
manipulate something. But all the same, inasmuch as an awaiting always
leads the way in the unity of the temporalizing of concem, concernful
Dasein's own potentiality-for-Being has, as we shall show, been given a
position in care. l
The making-present which awaits and retains, is constitutive for that
familiarity in accordance with which Dasein, as Being-with-one-another,
'knows its way about' [sich "auskennt"] in its public environment. Letting
things be involved is something which we understand existentially as a
letting-them-'be' [ein "Sein"-lassen]. On such a basis circumspection can
encounter the ready-to-hand as that entity which it is. Hence we can further
elucidate the temporality of concern by giving heed to those modes of
circumspectively letting something be encountered which we have
characterized abovexv111 as "conspicuousness", "obtrusiveness", and
"obstinacy". Thematical perception of Things is precisely not the way
equipment ready-to-hand is encountered in its 'true "in-itself" '; it is
encountered rather in the inconspicuousness of what we can come across
'obviously' and 'Objectively'. But if there is something conspicuous in
the totality of such entities, this implies that the equipmental totality as
such is obtruding itself along with it. What sort of existential structure
must belong to letting things be involved, if such a procedure can let
something be encountered as conspicuous? This question is now aimed
1 ' ••• in die Sorge gestellt.'

354

355

406
Being and Time
II. 4
not at those factical occasions which tum our attention to something
already presented, but rather at the ontological meaning of the fact that
it can thus be tumed.
When something cannot be used-when, for instance, a tool definitely
refuses to work-it can be conspicuous only in and for dealings in which
something is manipulated. Even by the sharpest and most persevering l
'perception' and 'representation' of Things, one can never discover anything like the damaging of a tool. If we are to encounter anything unmanageable, the handling must be ofsuch a sort that it can be disturbed.
But what does this signify ontological!JI? The making-present which awaits
and retains, gets held up with regard to its absorption in relationships of
involvement, and it gets held up by what will exhibit itself afterwards as
damage. The making-present, which awaits the "towards-which" with
equal primordiality, is held fast along~ide the equipment which has been
used, and it is held fast in such a manner, indeed, that the "towardswhich" and the "in-order-to" are now encountered explicitly for the first
time. On the other hand, the only way in which the making~presentitself
can meet up with anything unsuitable, is by already operating in such a
way as to retain awaitingly that which has an involvement in something.
To say that making-present gets 'held up' is to say that in its unity with
the awaiting which retains, it diverts itself into itself more and more, and
is thus constitutive for the 'inspecting' ["Nachsehen"], testing, and eliminating of the disturbance. If concernful dealings were merely a sequence of
'Experiences' running their course 'in time', however intimately these
might be 'associated', it would still be ontologically impossible to let any
conspicuous unusable equipment be encountered. Letting something be
involved must, as such, he grounded in the ecstatical unity of the makingpresent which awaits and retains, whatever we have made accessible in
dealing with contexts of equipment. 1
And how is it possible to 'ascertain' what is missing [Fehlendem]-that
is to say, un-ready-to-hand, not just ready-to-hand in an unmanageable
way? That which is un-ready-to-hand is discovered circumspectively
when we miss it [im Vnmissen]. The 'affirmation' that something is not
present-at-hand, is founded upon our missing it; and both our missing it
and our affirmation have their own existential presuppositions. Such
missing is by no means a not-making-present [Nichtgegenwartigen] ; it is
l 'anhaltendste'. This is the first of several compounds of the verb 'balten' ('to hold')
which appear in this and the following paragraphs. Others are 'behalten' ('retain' in
the sense of holding in one's memory), 'aufhalten' ('hold up' in the sense of delaying or
bringing to a hait), 'festhalten' ('hold fast').
li 'Das Bewendenlassen muss ais so1ches, was irnmer es auch an Zeugzusammenhiingen
umganglich zugiinglich macht, in der ekstatischen Einheit des gewiirtigen-behaltenden
Gegenwiirtigens gründen.'

Il. 4

Being and Time
407
rather a deficient mode of the Present in the sense of the making-unpresent
[Ungegenwartigens] of something which one has expected or which one
has always had at one's disposaI. If, when one circumspectively lets
something be involved, one were not 'from the outset' awaiting the object
of one's concem, and if such awaiting did not temporalize itself in a
uni!y with a making-present, then Dasein could never 'find' that something
is missing [fehlt].
On the other hand, when one is making present something ready-tohand by awaiting, the possibility of one's getting surprised by something is
based upon one's not awaiting something else which stands in a possible
context of involvement with what one awaits. In the not awaiting of the
making-present which is lost, the 'horizonal' leeway within which one's
Dasein can be assailed by something surprising is first disclosed.
That with which one's concernful dealings fail to cope, either by producing or procuring something, or even by turning away, holding aloof,
or protecting oneselffrom something, reveals itself in its insurmountability.
Concem resigns itself to it. l But resigning oneself to something is a mode 35 6
peculiar to circumspectively letting it be encountered. On the basis of
this kind of discovery concem can come across that which is inconvenient,
disturbing, hindering, endangering, or in general resistant in some way.
The temporal structure of resigning oneself to something, lies in a nonretaining which awaitingly makes present. In awaitingly making present,
one does not, for instance, reckon 'on' that which is unsuitable but none
the less available. "Not reckoning with" something, is a mode of "taking
into one's reckoning" that which one cannot cling to. That which one has
"not reckoned with" does not get forgotten; it gets retained, so that in
ils very unsuitabili!y it remains ready-to-hand. 2 That which is ready-to-hand
in this manner belongs to the everyday stock or content of the factically
disclosed environment.
Only in so far as something resistant has been discovered on the basis
of the ecstatical temporality of concem, can factical Dasein understand
itself in its abandonment to a 'world' of which it never becomes master.
Even if concem remains restricted to the urgency of everyday needs, it is
never a pure making-present, but arises from a retention which awaits;
on the basis of sucha retention, or as such a 'basis', Dasein exists in a
world. Thus in a certain manner, factically existent Dasein always knows
its way about, even in a 'world' which is alien.
l

'Das Besorgen findet sieh damit ab.'

2 'Die zeitIiche Struktur des Sichabfindens liegt in einem gewiirtigend-gegenwiirtigen-

den Unbehalten. Das gewiirtigende Gegenwiirtigen rechnet zum Beispie1 nicht "auf" das
Ungeeignete, aber gleichwohl Verfügbare. Das Nichtrechnen mit .•. ist ein Modus des
Rechnungtragens dem gegenüber, woran man sich nicht halten kann. Es wird nicht
vergessen, sondern behalten, so dass es gerade in seiner Ungeeignetheit zuhanden bleibt.'

408
Being and Time
II.4
When, in one's concern, one lets something be involved, one's doing so
is founded on temporality, and amounts to an altogether pre-ontological
and non-thematic way of understanding involvement and readiness-tohand. In what follows, it will be shown to what extent the understanding
of these types of Being as such is, in the end, also founded on temporality.
We must first give a more concrete demonstration of the temporality of
Being-in-the-world. With this as our aim, we shall trace how the theoretical
attitude towards the 'world' 'arises' out of circumspective concern with
the ready-to-hand. Not only the circumspective discovering of entities
within-the-world but also the theoretical discovering of them is founded
upon Being-in-the-world. The existential-temporal Interpretation ofthese
ways of discovering is preparatory to the temporal characterization of
this basic state of Dasein.

357

(b) The Temporal Meaning of the Way in which Circumspective Concern becomes
Modified into the Theoretical Discovery of the Present-at-hand Within-the-world
When in the course of existential ontological analysis we ask how theoretical
discovery 'arises' out of circumspective concern, this implies already that we
are not making a problem of the ontical history and development of
science, or of the factical occasions for it, or of its proximate goals. In
seeking the ontological genesis of the theoretieal attitude, we are asking
which of those conditions implied in Dasein's state of Being are existentially necessary for the possibility of Dasein's existing in the way of
scientific research. This formulation of the question is aimed at an existential conception of science. This must be distinguished from the 'logical'
conception which understands sciencewith regard to its results and defines
it as 'something established on an interconnection of true propositionsthat is, propositions counted as valid'. The existential conception understands science as a way of existence and thus as a mode of Being-in-theworld, which discovers or discloses either entities or Being. Yet a fully
adequate existential Interpretation of science cannot be carried out until
the meaning of Being and the 'connection' between Being and truth X1x have been
clarified in terms of the temporality of existence. l The following deliberations are preparatory to the understanding of this central problematic, within
which, moreover, the idea of phenomenology, as distinguished from the
preliminary conception of it which we indicated by way of introductionxx
will be developed for the first time.
Corresponding to the stage of our study at which we have now arrived,
a further restriction will be imposed upon our Interpretation of the theoretical attitude. We shall investigate only the way in which circumspective
1 The italirs in this and the following sentence appear only in the later editions.

Il. 4
Being and Time
409
concern with the ready-to-hand changes over into an exploration of
what we come across as present-at-hand within-the-world; and we shall
be guided by the aim of penetrating to the temporal Constitution of
Being-in-the-world in general.
In characterizing the change-over from the manipulating and using and
so forth which are circumspective in a 'practieal' way, to 'theoretical'
exploration, it would be easy to suggest that merely looking at entities is
something which emerges when concern holds back from any kind of manipulation. What is decisive in the 'emergence' of the theoretical attitude
would then lie in the disappearance of praxis. So if one posits 'practieal'
concern as the primary and predominant kind of Being which factical
Dasein possesses, the ontological possibility of 'theory' will be due to the
absence of praxis-that is, to a privation. But the discontinuance of a specific
manipulation in our concernful dealings does not simply leave the guiding
cïrcumspection behind as a remainder. Rather, our concern then diverts
itself specifically into a just-Iooking-around [ein Nur-sich-umsehen]. But
this is by no means the way in which the 'theoretical' attitude of science
is reached. On the contrary, the tarrying which is discontinur.d when one
manipulates, can take on the character of a more precise kind of circumspection, such as 'inspecting', checking up on what has been attained, or
looking over the 'operations' ["Betrieb"] which are now 'at a standstill'.
Holding back from the use of equipment is so far from sheer 'theory' that
the kind of circumspection which tarries and 'considers', remains wholly
in the grip of the ready-to-hand equipment with which one is concerned.
'Practical' dealings have their own ways of tarrying. And just as praxis has
its own specific kind ofsight ('theory'), theoretical research is not without
a praxis of its own. Reading off the measurements which result from an
experiment often requires a complicated 'technical' set-up for the experimental design. Observation with a microscope is dependent upon the
production of 'preparations'. Archaeological excavation, which precedes
any Interpretation of the 'findings', demands manipulations of the grossest
kind. But even in the 'most abstract' way of working out problems and
establishing what has been obtained, one manipulates equipment for
writing, for example. However 'uninteresting' and 'obvious' such components of scientific research may be, they are by no means a matter of
indifference ontologieally. The explicit suggestion that scientific behaviour
as a way of Being-in-the-world, is not just a 'purely intellectual activity',
may seem petty and superfluous. If only it were not plain from this
triviality that it is by no means patent where the ontological boundary
between 'theoretical' and 'atheoretical' behaviour really runs!
Someone will hold that aIl manipulation in the sciences is merely in the

358

Il. 4

4 10
Being and Time
II. 4
service of pure observation-the investigative discovery and disclosure of
the 'things themselves'. 'Seeing', taken in the widest sense, regulates all
'procedures' and retains its priority. 'To whatever kind of objects one's
knowledge may relate itself, and by whatever means it may do so, still
that through which it relates itself to them immediately, and which ail
thinking as a means kas as its goal (author's italics) is intuition.'xxI The idea
of the intuitus has guided all Interpretation of knowledge from the beginnings of Greek ontology until today, whether or not that intuitus can be
factically reached. If we are to exhibit the existential genesis of science in
accordance with the priority of 'seeing', we must set out by characterizing
the circumspection which is the guide for 'practical' concern.
Circumspection operates in the involvement-relationships of the context
359
of equipment which is ready-to-hand. Moreover, it is subordinate to the
guidance of a more or less explicit survey of the equipmental totality of
the current equipment-world and ofthe public environment which belongs
to it. This survey is not just one in which things that are present-at-hand
are subsequently scraped together. What is essential to it is that one should
have a primary understanding of the totality of involvements within which
factical concern always takes its start. Such a survey illumines one's
concern, and receives its 'light' from that potentiality-for-Being on the
part of DaseinJor the sake ofwhich concern exists as care. In one's current
using and manipulating, the concernful circumspection which does this
'surveying', brings the ready-to-hand closer to Dasein, and does so by
interpreting what has been sighted. This specifie way of bringing the
object of concern close by interpreting it circumspectively, we cali
"deliberating" [Vberlegung]. The scheme peculiar to this is the 'if-then';
if this or that, for instance, is to be produced, put to use, or averted, then
sorne ways and means, circumstances, or opportunities will be needed.
Circumspective deliberation illumines Dasein's current factical situation
in the environment with which it concerns itself. Accordingly, such
deliberation never merely 'affirms' that sorne entity is present-at-hand or
has such and such properties. Moreover, deliberation can be performed
even when that which is brought close in it circumspectively is not
palpably ready-to-hand and does not have presence within the closest
range. Bringing the environment closer in circumspective deliberation has
the existential meaning of a making present; for envisaging 1 is only a mode of
this. In envisaging, one's deliberation catches sight directly of that which
is needed but which is un-ready-to-hand. Circumspection which envisages
does not relate itselfto 'mere representations'.

Being and Time
411
Circumspective making-present, however, is a phenomenon with more
than one kind of foundation. In the first instance, it always belongs to a
full ecstatical unity of temporality. It is grounded in a retention of that
context of equipment with which Dasein concerns itself in awaiting a possibility. That which has already been laid open in awaiting and retaining
is brought closer by one's deliberative making-present or envisaging. 1
But if deliberation is to be able to operate in the scheme of the 'if-then',
concem must already have 'surveyed' a context ofinvolvements and have
an understanding of it. That which is considered with an 'if' must already
be understood as something or other. This does not require that the understanding of equipment be expressed in a predication. The schema 'something as something' has already been sketched out beforehand in the
structure of one's pre-predicative understanding. The as-structure is
grounded ontologically in the temporality of understanding. But on the
other hand, only to the extent that Dasein, in awaiting sorne possibility
(here this means a "towards-which"), has come back to a "towards-this"
(that is to say that it retains something ready-to-hand)--<>nly to this
extent can the making-present which belongs to this awaiting and retaining, start with what is thus retained, and bring it, in its character ofhaving
been assigned or referred to its "towards-which", explicitly closer. The
deliberation which brings it close must, in the schema of making present,
be in conformity with the kind of Being that belongs to what is to be
brought close. The involvement-character of the ready-to-hand does not
first get discovered by deliberation, but only gets brought close by it in
such a manner as to let that in which something kas an involvement, be
seen cii-cumspectively as this very thing.
The way the Present is rooted in the future and in having been, is the
existential-temporal condition for the possibility that what has been
projected in circumspective understanding can be brought closer in a
making-present, and in such a way that the Present can thus conform
itself to what is encountered within the horizon of awaiting and retaining;
this means that it must interpret itself in the schema of the as-structure.
We have thus answered the question we formulated earlier-the question
of whether the as-structure has sorne existential-ontological connection
with the phenomenon of projection.xxIl Like understanding and interpretation
in general, the 'as' is grounded in the ecstatico-horiz;onal unity of temporality. In
Our fundamental analysis of Being, and of course in connection with the
Interpretation of the 'is' (which, as a copula, gives 'expression' to
the addressing of something as something), we must again make the

1 Herc; Ù!-e ~amiliar noun 'Ve~egen~iirtigung'('envisaging') is printed with the first
syllable 10 ItalIcs to draw attentIOn to Its connection with the special phenomenological
verb 'Gegenwartigen' ('making present').

l 'Das im gewlirtigenden Behalten schon Aufgeschlossene bringt die überlegende
Gegcnwlirtigung bzw. Vergegenwlirtigung nliher.'

360

4 12
Being and Time
II. 4
phenomenon of the "as" a theme and delimit the conception of this
'schema' existentially.
The question ofthe genesis oftheoretical behaviour is one which we have
left hanging. What can a temporal characterization of circumspective
deliberation and its schemata contribute to the answering of it? Only
that this elucidates the Situation in which circumspective concem changes
over into theoretical discovering-a Situation of the kind which belongs
to Dasein. We may then try to analyse this change-over itself by taking
as our clue an elementary assertion which is circumspectively deliberative
in character and the modifications which are possible for it.
When we are using a tool circumspectively, we can say, for instance,
that the hammer is too heavy or too light. Even the proposition that the
hammer is heavy can give expression to a concernful deliberation, and
signify that the hammer is not an easy one-in other words, that it takes
force to handle it, or that it will be hard to manipulate. 1 But this proposition can also mean that the entity before us, which we already know
361 circumspectively as a hammer, has a weight-that is to say, it has the
'property' of heaviness: it exerts a pressure on what lies beneath it, and
it faUs if this is removed. When this kind of talk is so understood, it is no
longer spoken within the horizon ofawaiting and retaining an equipmental
totality and its involvement-relationships. What is said has been drawn
from looking at what is suitable for an entity with 'mass'. We have now
sighted something that is suitable for the hammer, not as a tool, but as a
corporeal Thing subject to the law of gravity. To talk circumspectively of
'too heavy' or 'too light' no longer has any 'meaning'; that is to say, the
entity in itself, as we now encounter it, gives us nothing with relation to
which it could be 'found' too heavy or too light.
Why is it that what we are talking about-the heavy hammer-shows
itself differently when Our way of talking is thus modified? Not because
we are keeping our distance from manipulation, nor because we are just
looking away [absehen] from the equipmental character of this entity,
but rather because we are looking at [ansehen] the ready-to-hand thing
which we encounter, and looking at it 'in a new way' as something presentat-hand. The understanding of Being by which our concernful dealings with
entities within-the-world have been guided has changed over. But if, instead
of deliberating circumspectively about something ready-to-hand, we 'take'
it as something present-at-hand, has a scientific attitude thus constituted
l'Auch der Satz: der Hammer ist schwer, kann einer besorgenden Oberlegung
Ausdruck geben und bedeuten: er ist nicht leicht, das heisst, er fordert zur Handhabung
Kraft! bzw. er wird die Hantierung erschweren.' Here Heidegger is exploiting the double
meanmg of the German pair of adjectives, 'schwer' and 'leicht' which may correspond
either to the English pair 'heavy' and 'light', or to the pair 'diffi~ult' and 'easy'.

II. 4
Being and Time
413
itself? Moreover, even that which is ready-to-hand can be made a theme
for scientific investigation and determination, for instance when one
studies someone's environment-his milieu-in the context of a historiological biography. The context of equipment that is ready-to-hand in an
everyday manner, its historical emergence and utilization, and its factical
role in Dasein-all these are objects for the science of economics. The
ready-to-hand can become the 'Object' of a science without having to
lose its character as equipment. A modification of our understanding of
Being does not seem to be necessarily constitutive for the genesis of the
theoretical attitude 'towards Things'. Certainly not, if this "modification"
is to imply a change in the kind of Being which, in understanding the
entity before us, we understand it to possess.
In our first description of the genesis of the theoretical attitude out of
circumspection, we have made basic a way oftheoreticaHy grasping entities
within-the-world-physical Nature-in which the modification of our
understanding ofBeing is tantamount to a change-over. In the 'physical'
assertion that 'the hammer is heavy' we overlook not only the tool-character
of the entity we encounter, but also something that belongs to any readyto-hand equipment: its place. Its place becomes a matter ofindifference.
This does not mean that what is present-at-hand loses its 'location' alto- 362
gether. But its place becomes a spatio-temporal position, a 'world-point',
which is in no way distinguished from any other. This implies not only
that the multiplicity of places of equipment ready-to-hand within the
confines of the environment becomes modified to a pure multiplicity of
positions, but that the entities of the environment are altogether released
from such confinement [entschrankt]. The aggregate of the present-at-hand
becomes the theme.
In the case before us, the releasing from such environmental confinement belongs to the way one's understanding of Being has been modified;
and it becomes at the same time a delimitationof the 'realm' of the presentat-hand, if one now takes as one's guiding clue the understanding ofBeing
in the sense of presence-at-hand. The more appropriately the Being of the
entities to be explored is understood under the guidance of an understanding ofBeing, and the more the totality ofentities has been Articulated
in its basic attributes as a possible area of subject-matter for a science, aH
the more secure will be the perspective for one's methodical inquiry.
The classical example for the historical development of a science and
even for its ontological genesis, is the rise ofmathematical physics. What is
decisive for its development does not lie in its rather high esteem for the
observation of'facts', nor in its 'application' ofmathematics in determining
the character ofnatural processes; it lies rather in the way in which Nature

363

414
Being and Time
II. 4
herself is matlumatically projected. In this projection something constantly
present-at-hand (matter) is uncovered beforehand, and the horizon is
opened so that one may be guided by looking at those constitutive items
in it which are quantitatively determinable (motion, force, location, and
time). Only 'in the light' of a Nature which has been projected in this
fashion can anything like a 'fact' be found and set up for an experiment
regulated and delimited in terms of this projection. The 'grounding' of
'factual science' was possible only because the researchers understood that
in principle there are no 'bare facts'. In the mathematical projection of
Nature, moreover, what is decisive is not primarily the mathematical as
such; what is decisive is that this projection discloses something that is a
priori. Thus the paradigmatic character ofmathematical natura! science
does not lie in its exactitude or in the fact that it is binding for 'Everyman'; it consists rather in the fact that the entities which it takes as its
theme are discovered in it in the only way in which entities can be discovered-by the prior projection of their state of Being. When the basic
concepts of that understanding of Being by which we are guided have
been worked out, the cIues of its methods, the structure of its way of
conceiving things, the possibility of truth and certainty which belongs to
it, the ways in which things get grounded or proved, the mode in which it
is binding for us, and the way it is communicated-all these will be
Determined. The totality of these items constitutes the full existential
conception of science.
The scientific projection of any entities which we have somehow encountered aIready lets their kind of Being be understood explicitly and
in such a manner that it thus becomes manifest what ways are possible
for the pure discovery of entities within-the-world. The Articulation of
the understanding of Being, the delimitation of an area of subject-matter
(a delimitation guided by this understanding), and the sketching-out of
the way of conceiving which is appropriate to such entities-alI these
belong to the totality of this projecting; and this totality is what we calI
"tlumatizing". Its aim is to free the entities we encounter within-the-world,
and to free them in such a way that they can 'throw themselves against' 1
a purediscovering-that is, that theycan become "Objects". Thematizing
Objectifies. It does not first 'posit' the entities, but frees them so that one
can interrogate them and determine their character 'Objectively'. Being
which Objectifies and which is alongside the present-at-hand within-the
world, is characterized by a distinctive kind of making-present. XXi11 This
making-present is distinguished from the Present ofcircumspection in that
1 • "entgegenwerfen" '. Heidegger is here calling attention to the fact that the word
'object' literally means 'something thrown against'.

Il. 4

Being and Time
4 15
_above alI-the kind of discovering which belongs to the science in
question awaits solely the discoveredness of the present-at-hand. This
awaiting of discoveredness has its existentielI basis in a resoluteness by
which Dasein projects itself towards its potentiality-for-Beingin the 'truth'.
This projection is possible because Being-in-the-truth makes up a definite
way in which Dasein may exist. We shalI not trace further how science has
its source in authentic existence. It is enough now ifwe understand that
the thematizing of entities within-the-world presupposes Being-in-theworld as the basic state of Dasein, and ifwe understand how it does so.
If the thematizing of the present-at-hand-the scientific projection of
Nature-is to become possible, Dasein must transcend the entities thematized.
Transcendence does not consist in Objectifying, but is presupposed by it.
If, however, the thematizing of the present-at-hand within-the-world is 3 64
a change-over from the concern which discovers by circumspection, then
one's 'practical' Being alongside the ready-tp-hand is something which a
transcendence of Dasein must already underlie.
If, moreover, thematizing modifies and Articulates the understanding of
Being, then, in so far as Dasein, the entity which thematizes, exists, it must
already understand something like Being. Such understanding of Being
can remain neutral. In that case readiness-to-hand and presence-at-hand
have not yet been distinguished; still less have they been conceived
ontologically. But if Dasein is to be able to have any dealings with a
context of equipment, it must understand something like an involvement,
even ifit does not do so thematicalIy: a world must have been disclosed to it.
With Dasein's factical existence, this world has been discIosed, if Dasein
illdeed exists essentialIy as Being-in-the-world. 1 And if Dasein's Being is
completely grounded in temporality, then temporality must make
possible Being-in-the-world and therewith Dasein's transcendence; this
transcendence in turn provides the support for concernful Being alongside
entities within-the-world, whether this Being is theoretical or practical.
(c) Tlu Temporal Problem of the Transcendence of tlu World
Circumspective concern includes the understanding of a totality of involvements, and this understanding is based upon a prior understanding
ofthe relationships ofthe "in-order-to", the "towards-which",the "towardsthis" , and the "for-the-sake-of". The interconnection of these relationships
has been exhibited earlierxx1v as "significance". Their unity makes up what
we calI the "world". The question arises of how anything like the world
in its unity with Dasein is ontologicalIy possible. In what way must the
world be, if Dasein is to be able to exist as Being-in-the-World?
1 In the older editions this sentence is introduced by 'Und' ('And').

4 16
Being and Time
II. 4
Dasein exists for the sake ofa potentiality-for-Being of itself. In existing,
it has been thrown; and as something thrown, it has been delivered over to
entities which it needs in order to be able to be as it is-namely, for the sake
of itself. In so far as Dasein exists factically, it understands itself in the
way its "for-the-sake-of-itself" is thus connected with sorne current "inorder-to". That inside which existing Dasein understands itselj, is 'there'
along with its factical existence. That inside which one primarily understands oneselfhas Dasein's kind ofBeing. Dasein is its world existingly.
We have defined Dasein's Being as "care". The ontological meaning of
"care" is temporality. We have shown that temporality constitutes the
365 disclosedness of the "there", and we- have shown how it does so. In
the disclosedness of the "there" the world is disclosed along with it. The
unity of significance-that is, the ontological constitution of the worldmust then likewise be grounded in temporality. The existential-temporal
condition for the possibility of the world lies in the fact that temporality, as an
ecstatical unity, has something like a horizon. Ecstases are not simply raptures
in which one gets carried away. Rather, there belongs to each ecstasis a
'whither' to which one is carried away.l This "whither" of the ecstasis
we calI the "horizonal schema". In each of the three ecstases the ecstatical
horizon is different. The schema in which Dasein cornes towards itself
futurally, whether authentically or inauthentically, is the ''for-the-sake-ofitself"· The schema in which Dasein is disclosed to itselfin a state-of-mind
as thrown, is to be taken as that in the face of which it has been thrown
and that to which it has been abandoned. This characterizes the horizonal
schema of what has been. In existing for the sake of itself in abandonment
to itself as something that has been thrown, Dasein, as Being-alongside,
is at the same time making present. The horizonal schema for the Present
is defined by the "in-order-to".
The unity of the horizonal schemata of future, Present, and having
been, is grounded in the ecstatical unity of temporality. The horizon of
temporality as a whole determines that whereupon [woraufhin] factically
existing entities are essentially disclosed. With one's factical Being-there, a
potentiality-for-Being is in each case projected in the horizon of the
future, one's 'Being-already' is disclosed in the horizon of having been,
and that with which one concerns oneself is discovered in the horizon of
the Present. The horizonal unity of the schemata of these ecstases makes
possible the primordial way in which the relationships of the "in-orderto" are connected with the "for-the-sake-of". This implies that on the
basis of the horizonal constitution of the ecstatical unity of temporality,
. l'Die f:kstasen sind nicht einfach Entrückungen zu ... Vielmehr gehôrt zur Ekstase
em "Wohm" der Entrückung.'

Il. 4

Being and Time
417
there belongs to that entity which is in each case its own "there", something like a world that has been disclosed.
Just as the Present arises in the unity of the ternporalizing oftemporality
out of the future and having been, the horizon of a Present ternporalizes
itself equiprimordially with those of the future and of having been. In sa
far as Dasein temporalizes itself, a world is too. In ternporalizing itself
with regard to its Being as temporality, Dasein is 1 essentially 'in a world',
by reasqn of the ecstatico-horizonal constitution of that temporality. The
world is neither present-at-hand nor ready-to-hand, but temporalizes
itself in ternporality. It 'is', with the "outside-of-itself" of the ecstases,
'there'. If no Dasein exists, no world is 'there' either.
The world is alreat:[y presupposed in one's Being alongside the ready-tohand concernfully and factically, in one's thematizing of the present-athand, and in one's discovering ofthis latter entity by Objectification; that
is to say, ail these are possible only as ways of Being-in-the-world. Having
its ground [gründend] in the horizonal unity of ecstatical temporality, the
world is transcendent. It must already have been ecstatically disclosed sa
that in terms of it entities within-the-world can be encountered. Temporality already maintains itself ecstatically within the horizons ofits ecstasesj
and in temporalizing itself, it cornes back to those entities which are
encountered in the "there". With Dasein's factical existence, entities
within-the-world are already encountered too. The fact that such entities
are discovered along with Dasein's own "there" of existence, is not left
to Dasein's discretion. Only what it discovers and discloses on occasion, in
what direction it does so, how and how far it does so--only these are
matters for Dasein's freedom, even if always within the limitations of its
thrownness.
Thus the significance-relationships which determine the structure of the
world are not a network of forms which a worldless subject has laid over
sorne kind of material. What is rather the case is that factical Dasein,
understanding itself and its world ecstatically in the unity of the "there",
cornes back from these horizons to the entities encountered within them.
Coming back to these entities understandingly is the existential meaning
ofletting them be encountered by making them present; that is why we
call them entities "within-the-world". The world is, as it were, already
'further outside' than any Object can ever be. The 'problem of transcendence' cannot be brought round to the question ofhow a subject cornes
out to an Object, where the aggregate ofObjects is identified with the idea
of the world. Rather we must ask: what makes it ontologically possible
for entities ta be encountered within-the-world and Objectified as sa
1 Italics supplied in later editions only.

o

3 66

Being and Time
II. 4
encountered? This can be answered by recourse to the transcendence of
the world-a transçendence with an ecstatico-horizonal foundation.
If the 'subject' gets conceived ontologically as an existing Dasein whose
Being is grounded in temporality, then one must say that the world is
'subjective'. But in that case, this 'subjective' world, as one that is temporally transcendent, is 'more Objective' than any possible 'abject'.
When Being-in-the-world is traced back to the ecstatico-horizonal
unity of temporality, the existential-ontological possibility of this basic
state of Dasein is made intelligible. At the same time it becomes plain
that a' concrete working-out of the world-structure in general and its
possible variations can be tackled only if the ontology of possible entities
within-the-world is oriented securely enough by c1arifying the idea of
Being in generaI. If an Interpretation of this idea is to be possible, the
temporality of Dasein must be exhibited beforehand; here our characterization of Being-in-the-world will be of service.
418

36 7

~ 70. The Temporality of the Spatiality that is Characteristic of Dasein

Though the expression 'temporality' does not signify what one understands by "time" when one talks about 'space and time', nevertheless
spatiality seems to make up another basic attribute ofDasein corresponding to temporality. Thus with Dasein's spatiality, existential-temporal
analysis seems to come to a limit, so that this entity which we calI
"Dasein", must be considered as 'temporal' 'and also' as spatial coordinately. Ras our existential-temporal analysis of Dasein thus been
brought to a haIt by that phenomenon with which we have become
acquainted as the spatiality that is characteristic of Dasein, and which
we have pointed out as belonging to Being-in-the-world ?xxv
If in the- course of our existential Interpretation we were to talk
about Dasein's having a 'spatio-temporal' character, we could not mean
that this entity is present-at-hand 'in space and also in time'; this needs
no further discussion. Temporality is the meaning of the Being of care.
Dasein's constitution and its ways to be are possible ontologically only on
the basis of temporality, regardless of whether this entity occurs 'in time'
or not. Rence Dasein's specific spatiality must be grounded in temporality.
On the other hand, the demonstration that this spatiality is existentially
possible only through temporality, cannot aim either at deducing space
from time or at dissolving it into pure time. If Dasein's spatiality is
'embraced' by temporality in the sense ofbeing existentially founded upon
it, then this connection between them (which is to be c1arified in what
follows) is also different from the priority of time over space in Kant's
sense. To say that our empirical representations ofwhat is present-at-hand

Il. 4

Being and Time
419
'in space' run their course 'in time' as psychical occurrences, so that
the 'physical' occurs mediately 'in time' also, is not to give an existentialontological Interpretation of space as a form of intuition, but rather to
establish ontically that what is psychically present-at-hand runs its
course 'in time'.
We must now make an existential-analytical inquiry as to the temporal
conditions, for the possibility of the spatiality that is characteristic of
Dasein-the spatiality upon which in turn is founded the uncovering of
space within-the-world. We must first remember in what way Dasein is
spatial. Dasein can be spatial only as care, in the sense of existing as
factically falling. Negatively this means that Dasein is never present-atband in space, not even proximalIy. Dasein does not fill up a bit of space
as a Real Thing or item of equipment would, so that the boundaries
dividing it from the surrounding space would themselves just define that
space spatially. Dasein takes space in; this is to be understood literalIy.l
It is by no means just present-at-hand in a bit of space which its body
fills up. In existing, it bas aIready made room for its own leeway. It
determines its own location in such a manner that it cornes back from the
space it has made room for to the 'place' which it has reserved. B To be
able to say that Dasein is present-at-hand at a position in space, we must
first take [auffassen] this entity in a way which is ontologically inappropriate. Nor does the distinction between the 'spatiality' of an extended
Thing and that of Dasein lie in the fact that Dasein knows about space;
for taking space in [das Raum-einnehmen] is so far from identical with
a 'representing' of the spatial, that it is presupposed by it instead. Neither
may Dasein's spatiality be interpreted as an imperfection which adheres
to existence by reason of the fatal 'linkage of the spirit to a body'. On the
contrary, because Dasein is 'spiritual', and onry because of this, it can be
spatial in a way which remains essentially impossible for any extended
corporeal Thing.
Dasein's making room for itself is constituted by directionality and
de-severance. Row is anything of this sort existentially possible on the
1 'Das Dasein nimmt-im wortlichen Verstande--Raum ein.' The expression 'nimmt
Raum ein' would ordinarily be translatable as 'occupies space' or even 'takes up space'.
But Heidegger is here interpreting it in a way which is doser to the root meaning.
2 'Existierend hat es sich je schon einen Spielraum eingeraumt. Es bestimmt je seinen
eigenen Ort so, dass es aus dem eingeraumten Raum auf den "Platz" zurückkommt,
den es belegt hat.' This passage can be read in several ways. 'Spielraum' (our 'Ieeway')
means literally a 'space--or room-for playing'. The expression 'belegen einen Platz'
ordinarily means to book or reserve a seat at a theatre or some other place of entertainment; but in a more general and basic sense, 'belegen' (which is a word of many meanings) can also mean to spread something over something else so as to 'occupy' it
completely-as one spreads a slice of bread with butter or covers a wall with plaster.
On 'einraumen' see our note l, p. 146, H. I I I above.

368

Being and Time
II. 4
basis of Dasein's temporality? The function of temporality as the foundation for Dasein's spatiality will be indicated briefiy, but no more than is
necessary for our later discussions of the ontological meaning of the
'coupling together' of space and time. To Dasein's making room for itself
belongs the self-directive discovery of something like a region. By this
expression what we have in mind in the first instance is the "whither" for
the possible belonging-somewhere of equipment which is ready-to-hand
environmentally and which can be placed. Whenever one cornes across
equipment, handles it, or moves it around or out of the way, sorne region
has already been discovered. Concernful Being-in-the-world is directional
-self-directive. Belonging-somewhere has an essential relationship to
involvement. It always Determines itself factically in terms of the
involvement-context of the equipment with which one concerns oneself.
Relationships of involvement are intelligible only within the horizon of
a world that has been disclosed. Their horizonal character, moreover,
is what first makes possible the specifie horizon of the "whither" of
belonging-somewhere regionally. The self-directive discovery ofa region is
grounded in an ecstatically retentive awaiting of the "hither" and
"thither" that are possible. Making room for oneself is a directional
awaiting of a region, and as such it is equiprimordially a bringing-close
(de-severing*) of the ready-to-hand and present-at-hand. Out of the
region that has been discovered beforehand, concern cornes back deseverandy to that which is closest. Bath bringing-close and the estimating
and measurement of distances within that whieh has been de-severed and
is present-at-hand within-the-world, are grounded in a making-present
belonging to the unity of that temporality in which directionality too
becomes possible.
Because Dasein as temporality is ecstatieo-horizonal in its Being, it can
take along with it a space for which it has made room, and it can do so
factically and constandy. With regard to that space which it has ecstatically taken in, the "here" of its current factical situation [Lage bzw.
Situation] never signifies a position in space, but signifies rather the
leeway of the range of that equipmental totality with which it is most
closely concerned-a leeway which has been opened up for it in directionality and de-severance.
Bringing-close makes possible the kind of handling and Being-busy
which is 'absorbed in the thing one is handling' ["in der Sache aufgehende"]; and in such bringing-close, the essential structure of carefalling-makes itselfknown. In falling, and therefore also in the bringingclose which is founded 'in the present', the forgetting which awaits, leaps
after the Present; this is what is distinctive in the existential-temporal
420

369

II. 4
Being and Time
421
Constitution offalling. 1 When we make something present by bringing it
close from its "thence" [seinem Dorther], the making-present forgets the
"yonder" [das Dort] and loses itselfin itself. Thus it cornes about that if
'observation' of entities within-the-world commences in such a makingpresent, the illusion arises that 'at first' only a Thing is present-at-hand,
here of course, but indefinitely-in a space in general.
On{y on the basis of its ecstatico-horizonal temporality is it possible for Dasein
10 break into space. The world is not present-at-hand in space; yet only
within a world does space let itself be discovered. The ecstatical temporality of the spatiality that is characteristic of Dasein, makes it intelligible
that space is independent of time; but on the other hand, this same
temporality also makes intelligible Dasein's 'dependence' on space-a
'dependence' which manifests itself in the well-known phenomenon that
both Dasein's interpretation of itself and the whole stock of significations
which belong tp language in general are dominated through and through
by 'spatial representations'. This priority of the spatial in the Articulation
of concepts and significations has its basis not in sorne specifie power
which space possesses, but in Dasein's kind of Being. Temporality is
essentially falling, and it loses itself in making present; not only does it
understand itselfcircumspectively in terms of objects ofconcern which are
ready-at-hand, but from those spatial relationships which making-present
is constandy meeting in the ready-to-hand as having presence, it takes its
clues for Articulating that which has been understood and can be interpreted in the understanding in general.
, 7I. The Temporal Meaning of Dasein's Everydayness
We have given an Interpretation of sorne structures which are essential
to Dasein's state-of-Being, and we have done so before exhibiting temporality, but with the aim ofleading up to this. Our analysis ofthe temporality
of concern has shown that these structures must be taken back into temporality existentially. At the very start of our analytic we did not choose as
our theme any definite and distinctive possibility of Dasein's existence;
our analytic was oriented rather by the average way ofexisting, which has
nothing conspicuous about it. We called that kind of Being in which
Dasein maintains itself proximally and for the most part "everdayness",.xxvi
What this expression signifies at bottom when delimited ontologically,
remains obscure. At the beginning of our study, moreover, we could not
see any way ofeven making the existential-ontological meaning of "everydayness" a problem. By now, however, sorne light has been cast on the
l 'Dessen existenzial-zeitliche Konstitution ist dadurch ausgezeichnet, dass in ihm und
damit auch in der "gegenwiirtig" fundierten Niiherung das gewiirtigende Vergessen der
Gegenwart nachspringt.'

370

Being and Time
II. 4
meaning of Dasein's Being as temporality. Can there still be any doubt
as to the existential-temporal signification of the term "everydayness"?
AIl the same, we are far removed from an ontological conception of this
phenomenon. It even remains questionable whether the explication of
temporality which we have so far carried through is sufficient to delimit
the existential meaning of "everydayness".
"Everydayness" manifesÙy stands for that way of existing in which
Dasein maintains itself 'every day' ["aIle Tage"]. And yet this 'every day'
does not signify the sum of those 'days' which have been allotted to Dasein
in its 'lifetime'. Though this 'every day' is not to be understood calendrical1y, there is still an overtone of sorne such temporal character in the
signification of the 'everyday' ["Alltag"]. But what we have primarily
in mind in the expression "everydayness" is a definite "how" of existence
by which Dasein is dominated through and through 'for life' ["zeiùebens"].
In our analyses we have often used the expression 'proximally and for the
most part'. 'Proximal1y' signifies the way in which Dasein is 'manifest'
in the "with-one-another" of publicness, even if 'at bottom' everydayness
is precisely something which, in an existentiell manner, it has 'surmounted'.
'For the most part' signifies the way in which Dasein shows itself for
Everyman, not always, but 'as a rule'.
"Everydayness" means the "how" in accordance with which Dasein
'lives unto the day' ["in den Tag hineinlebt"], whether in aIl its ways of
behaving or only in certain ones which have been prescribed by Beingwith-one-another. To this "how" there belongs further the comfortableness of the accustomed, even if it forces one to do something burdensome
and 'repugnant'. That which will come tomorrow (and this is what everyday concern keeps awaiting) is 'eternally yesterday's'. In everydayness
everything is aIl one and the same, but whatever the day may bring is
taken as diversification. Everydayness is determinative for Dasein even
when it has not chosen the "they" for its 'hero'.
These manifold characteristics of everydayness, however, by no means
designate it as a mere 'aspect' afforded by Dasein when 'one looks at' the
things men do. Everydayness is a way to be-to which, ofcourse, that which
is publicly manifest belongs. But it is more or less familiar to any 'individual' Dasein as a way of existing which it may have as its own,.and it is
familiar to it through that state-of-mind which consists of a pallid lack of
mood. In everydayness Dasein can undergo duH 'suffering', sink away in
the dUIlness of it, and evade it by seeking new ways in which its dispersion
in its affairs may be further dispersed. In the moment of vision, indeed,
and oftenjust 'for that moment', existence can even gain the mastery over
the "everyday"; but it can never extinguish it.
422

II. 4
Being and Time
42 3
That which is onticalfy so familiat in the way Dasein has been factically
interpreted that we never pay any heed to it, hides enigma after enigma
existential-ontologicaIly. The 'natural' horizon for starting the existential
analytic of Dasein is onfy seemingfy self-evident.
But after the Interpretation of temporality which we have given thus
far, do we find ourselves in any more promising a situation with regard
to delimiting the structure of everydayness existentiaIly? Or does this
bewildering phenomenon make the inadequacy of our explication of temporality aH too patent? Have we not hitherto been constanùy immobilizing Dasein in certain situations, while we have, 'consistenùy' with this,
been disregarding the fact that in living unto its days Dasein stretches itself
along 'temporaIly' in the sequence of those days?l The "it's aIl one and
the same", the accustomed, the 'like yesterday, so today and tomorrow',
and the 'for the most part'-these are not to be grasped without recourse
to this 'temporal' stretching-along of Dasein.
And is it not also a Fact of existing Dasein that in spending its time it
takes 'time' into its reckoning from day to dayand regulates this 'reckoning'
astronomically and calendricaIly? Only if both Dasein's everyday
'historizing'2 and the reckoning with 'time' with which it concerns itself
in this historizing, are included in our Interpretation ofDasein's temporality, will our orientation be embracing enough to enable us to make a
problem ofthe ontological meaning of everydayness as such. But because
at bottom we mean by the term "everydayness" nothing else than temporality, while temporality is made possible by Dasein's Being, 3 an
adequate conceptual delimitation of everydayness can succeed only in a
framework in which the meaning of Being in general and its possible
variations are discussed in principle.
l 'Haben wir bisher nicht stiindig das Dasein auf gewisse Lagen und Situationen
stillge!egt und "konsequent" missachtet, dass es sich, in seine Tage hineiniebend, in der
Foige seiner Tage "zeltlich" eTstreckt?' The oider editions have 'stillgestellt' rather than
'stillge!egt.'
2' "Geschehen" '. Cf. our note 1, p. 41, H. 19 above.
8 'Weil jedoch mit dem Tite! Alltïïglichkeit im Gronde nichts anderes gemeint ist ais
die Zeitlichkeit, diese aber das Sein des Daseins ermoglicht .•• '

372

v
TEMPORALITY AND HISTORICALITY
~ 72. Existential-ontological Exposition of the Problem ofHistory
ALL our efforts in the existential analytic serve the one aim of finding a
possibility of answering the question of the meaning of Being l in general.
To work out this question,l we need to delimit that very phenomenon in
which something like Being becomes accessible-the phenomenon of the
understanding of Being. But this phenomenon is one that belongs to Dasein's
state ofBeing. Only after this entity has been Interpreted in a way which
is sufficiently primordial, can we have a conception of the understanding
of Being, which is included in its very state of Being; only on this basis
can we formulate the question of the Being which is understood in this
understanding, and the question of what such understanding 'presupposes'.
Even though many structures of Dasein when taken singly are still
obscure, it seems that by casting light upon temporality as the primordial
condition for the possibility of care, we have reached the primordial
Interpretation ofDasein which we require. We have exhibited temporality
with a view to Dasein's authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole. We
have then confirmed the temporal Interpretation ofcare by demonstrating
the temporality of concernful Being-in-the-world. Our analysis of the
authentic potentiality-for-Being-a-whole has revealed that in care is
rooted an equiprimordial connectedness of death, guilt, and conscience.
Can° Dasein be understood in a way that is more primordial than in the
projection of its authentic existence?
Although up till now we have seen no possibility of a more radical
approach to the existential analytic, yet, if we have regard for the preceding discussion of the ontological meaning of everydayness, a difficult
consideration cornes to light. Have we indeed brought the whole ofDasein,
as regards its authentically Being-a-whole, into the fore-having of our
existential analysis? It may be that a formulation of the question as
1 Italles provided only in the later editions.

Il.5
Being and Time
425
related to Dasein's totality, possesses a genuinely unequivocal character
ontologically. It may be that as regards Being-towards-the-end the question
itselfmay even have found its answer. But death is only the 'end' ofDasein;
and, taken formally, it is just one of the ends by which Dasein's totality
is closed round. The other 'end', however, is the 'beginning', the 'birth'.
Only that entity which is 'between' birth and death presents the whole
which we have been seeking. Accordingly the orientation of our analytic
has so far remained 'one-sided', in spite of all its tendencies towards a
consideration of existent Being-a-whole and in spite of the genuineness with
which authentic and inauthentic Being-towards-death have been explicated. Dasein has been our theme only in the way in which it exists
'facing forward', as it were, leaving 'behind it' aIl that has been. Not only
has Being-towards-the-beginning remained unnoticed; but so too, and
above aH, has the way in which Dasein stretches along between birth and
death. The 'connectedness of life', in which Dasein somehow maintains
itself constantly, is precisely what we have overlooked in our analysis of
Being-a-whole.
We have regarded temporality as the meaning of the Being of Dasein's
totality; must we not now take this back, even if what we have described
as the 'connectedness' between birth and death is ontologically quite
obscure? Or does temporality, as we have exhibited it, first of aIl give us the
basis on which to provide an unequivocal direction for the existentialontological question ofthis 'connectedness'? In the field ofthese investigations, it is perhaps already a gain, when we learn not to take problems
too lightly.
What seems 'simpler' than to characterize the 'connectedness of life'
between birth and death? It consists of a sequence of Experiences 'in
time'. But if one makes a more penetrating study of this way of characterizing the 'connectedness' in question, and especially of the ontological
assumptions behind it, the remarkable upshot is that, in this sequence
of Experiences, what is 'really' 'actual' is, in each case, just that Experience which is present-at-hand 'in the current "now" " while those Experiences which have passed away or are only coming along, either are no
longer or are not yet 'actual'. Dasein traverses the span of time granted
to it between the two boundaries, and it does so in such a way that, in
each case, it is 'actual' only in the "now", and hops, as it were, through
the sequence of "nows" of its own 'time'. Thus it is said that Dasein is
'temporal'. In spite of the constant changing of these Experiences, the
Self maintains itself throughout with a certain selfsameness. Opinions
diverge as to how that which thus persists is to be defined, and how one is to
determine what relation it may possibly have to the changing Experiences.

373

374

426
Being and Time
II. 5
The Being of this perseveringly changing connectedness of Experiences
remains indefinite. But at bottom, whether one likes it or not, in this way
of characterizing the connectedness of life, one has posited something
present-at-hand 'in time', though something that is obviously 'unThinglike'•
If we have regard for what we have worked out under the tiùe of
"temporality" as the meaning of the Being of care, we find that while the
ordinary interpretation of Dasein, within its own limits, has its justification and is sufficient, we cannot carry through a genuine ontological
analysis of the way Dasein stretches along between birth and death if we
take this interpretation as our clue, nor can we even fix upon such an
analysls as a problem.
Dasein does not exist as the sum of the momentary actualities of Experiences which come along successively and disappear. Nor is there a sort of
framework which this succession gradually fills up. For how is such a
framework to be present-at-hand, where, in each case, only the Experience
one is having 'right now' is 'actual',l and the boundaries of the framework
-the birth which is past and the death which is only oncoming-Iack
actuality? At bottom, even in the ordinary way oftaking the 'connectedness oflife', one does not think ofthis as a framework drawn tense 'outside'
of Dasein and spanning it round, but one righùy seeks this connectedness
in Dasein itself. When, however, one taciùy regards this entity ontologicaIly
as something present-at-hand 'in time', any attempt at an ontological
characterization of the Being 'between' birth and death will break
down.
Dasein does not fiIl up a track or stretch 'oflife'-one which is somehow
present-at-hand-with the phases ofits momentary actualities. It stretches
itself along in such a way that its own Being is constituted in advance as
a stretching-along. The 'between' which relates to birth and death already
lies in the Being of Dasein. On the other hand,it is by no means the case that
Dasein 'is' actual in a point of time, and that, apart from this, it is 'surrounded' by the non-actuality of its birth and death. Understood existentiaIly, birth is not and never is something past in the sense of something
no longer present-at-hand; and death is just as far from having the kind
of Being of something still outstanding, not yet present-at-hand but
coming along. Factical Dasein exists as born; and, as born, it is already
dying, in the sense of Being-towards-death. As long as Dasein facticaIly
exists, both the 'ends' and their 'between' are, and they are in the only
way which is possible on the basis of Dasein's Being as care. Thrownness
and that Being towards death in which one either Hees it or anticipates
1'••• wo dochje nur das "aktuelle" Erlebnis "wirklich" ist ....

Being and Time
427
it, form a unity; and in this unity birth and death are 'connected' in a
manner characteristic of Dasein. As care, Dasein is the 'between'.
In temporality, however, the constitutive totality of care has a possible
basis for its unity. Accordingly it is within the horizon ofDasein's temporal
constitution that we must approach the ontological clarification of the
'connectedness oflife'-that is to say, the stretching-along, the movement,
and the persistence which are specifie for Dasein. The movement [Bewegt- 375
heit] of existence is not the motion [Bewegung] of something present-athand. It is definable in terms of the way Dasein stretches along. The
specific movement in which Dasein is stretched along and str~tches itself along,
we calI its "histori:âng".l The question of Dasein's 'connectedness' is the
ontological problem of Dasein's historizing. To Jay bare the structure of
histori;:,ing, and the existential-temporal conditions of its possibility,
signifies that one has achieved an ontological understanding of
historicality. 2
With the analysis ofthe specific movement and persistence which belong
to Dasein's historizing, we come back in our investigation to the problem
which we touched upon immediately before exposing temporality to
view-the question of the constancy of the Self, which we defined as the
"who" of Dasein. 1 Self-comtancya is a way of Being of Dasein, and is
therefore grounded in a specific temporalizing oftemporality. The analysis
of historizing will lead us face to face with the problems of a thematical
investigation of temporalizing as such.
If the question of historicality leads us back to these 'sources', then the
locus of the problem of history has aIready been decided. This locus is
not to be sought in historiology as the science of history. Even if the
problem of 'history' is treated in accordance with a theory of science, not
only aiming at the 'epistemological' clarification of the historiological way
of grasping things (Simmel) or at the logic with which the concepts of
historiological presentation are formed (Rickert), but doing so with an
orientation towards 'the side of the object', then, as long as the question
is formulated this way, history becomes in principle accessible only as the
Object of a science. Thus the basic phenomenon of history, which is prior
to any possible thematizing by historiology and underlies it, has been
irretrievably put aside. How history can become a possible object for historiology is something that may be gathered only from the kind of Being

Il. 5

l'Die spezifische Bewegtheit des erstreckten Sicherstreckens nennen wir das Geschehen des
Daseins.' On 'Geschehen' see our note l, p. 41, H. 19 above.
Il On 'historicality' ('Geschichtlichkeit') see o~ note 2, p. 31, H. !!! abo~e.
.
8 'Selbst-standigkeit'. Here we follow the readmg o~ ~e older ed1ti0n:' m 'Yh1ch the
hyphen cornes at the end of a line. In the newer edltions the hyphen 15 OmIttedj but
presumably Heidegger intends the same expanded spelling which we have already met
on H. 322 and H. 332. See our notes ad loc.

428

376

Being and Time
II. 5
which belongs to the historical-from historicality, and from the way it
is rooted in temporality.
If we are to cast light on historicality itself in terms of temporality,
and primordially in terms oftemporalitythat is authentic, then it is essential
to this task that we can carry it out only by construing it phenomenologically.l1 The existential-ontological constitution of historicality has
been covered up by the way Dasein's history is ordinarily interpreted; we
must get hold of it in spite of aIl this. The existential way of construing
historicality has its definite supports in the ordinary understanding of
Dasein, and is guided by those existential structures at which we have
hitherto arrived.
We shall fust describe the ordinary ways in which history is conceived,
so that we may give our investigation an orientation as to those items
which are commonly held to be essential for history. Here, it must be
made plain what is primordially considered as historical. The point of
attack for expounding the ontological problem of historicality will thus
be designated.
Our Interpretation of Dasein's authentic potentiality-for-Being-awhole and our analysis of care as temporality-an analysis which has
arisen from this Interpretation-offer us the clue for construing historicality existentially. The existential projection of Dasein's historicality
merely reveals what already lies enveloped in the temporalizing of
temporality. In accordance with the way in which historicality is rooted
in care, Dasein exists, in each case, as authentically or inauthentically
historical. It becomes plain that Dasein's inauthentic historicality lies in
that which-under the title of "everydayness"-we have looked upon, in
the existential analytic ofDasein, as the horizon that is closest to us.
Disclosing and interpreting belong essentially to Dasein's historizing.
Out of this kind of Being of the entity which exists historically, there
arises the existentiell possibility of disclosing history explicitly and getting
it in our grasp. The fact that we can make history our theme-that is to
say, disclose it historiological!J-is the presupposition for the possibility
of the way one 'builds up the historical world in the humane sciences'.
The existential Interpretation of historiology as a science aims solely at
demonstrating its ontological derivation from Dasein's historicality.
Only from here can we stake out the boundaries within which any theory
of science that is oriented to the factical workings of science, may expose
itself to the accidentaI factors in its way offormulating questions.
In anafysing the historicality of Dasein we shall try to show that this entity is
not 'temporal' hecause it 'stands in history', hut that, on the contrary, it exists
historicalfy and can so exist onfy hecause it is temporal in the very hasis of its Being.

Il.5
Being and Time
429
Nevertheless, Dasein must also be called 'temporal' in the sense of
Being 'in time'. Even without a developed historiology, factical Dasein
needs and uses a calendar and a clock. Whatever may happen 'to Dasein',
it experiences it as happening 'in time'. In the same way, the processes of
Nature, whether living or lifeless, are encountered 'in time'. They are
within-time. So while our analysis of how the 'time' of within-time-ness
has its source in temporality will be deferred until the next chapter,Ul it
would be easy to put this before our discussion of the connection between
historieality and temporality. The historical is ordinarily characterized
with the help of the time ofwithin-time-ness. But ifthis ordinary characterization is to he stripped of its seeming self-evidence and exclusiveness,
historicality must fust he 'deduced' purely in terms of Dasein's primordial
temporality; this is demanded even by the way these are 'objectively'
connccted. Since, however, time as within-time-ness also 'stems' from the
temporality of Dasein, historicality and within-time-ness turn out to be
equiprimordial. Thus, within its limits, the ordinary interpretation of the
temporal character of history is justified.
Mter this first characterization ofthe course ofthe ontological exposition
of historicality in terms of temporality, do we still need explicit assurance
that the following investigation does not rest upon a belief that the
problem of history is to be solved by a coup de main? The poverty of the
'categorial' means at our disposal, and the unsureness of the primary
ontological horizons, become the more obtrusive, the more the problem of
history is traced to its primordial roots. In the following study, we shall
content ourselves with indicating the ontological locus of the problem of
historicality. The researches of Dilthey were, for their part, pioneering
work; but today's generation has not as yet made them its own. In the
following analysis the issue is solely one of furthering their adoption.
Our exposition of the existential problem ofhistoricality-an exposition
which is necessarily limited, moreover, in that its goal is one of fundamental ontology-is divided up as follows: the ordinary understanding of
history, and Dasein's historizing (Section 73); the basic constitution of
historicality (Section 74) ; Dasein's historicality, and world-history (Section
75); the existential source ofhistoriology in Dasein's historicality (Section
76); the connection of the foregoing exposition of the problem of historicality with the researches of Dilthey and the ideas of Count Yorck
(Section 77).
~ 73. The Ordinary Understanding of History, and Dasein's Histori;:,ing

Our next aim is to find the right position for attacking the primordial
question of the essence ofhistory-that is to say, for construing historicality

377

37 8

430
Being and Time
II. 5
existentiaIly. This position is designated by that which is primordially
historical. We shall begin our study, therefore, by characterizing what one
has in view in using the expressions 'history' and 'historical' in the
ordinary interpretation of Dasein. These expressions get used in several
ways.
The most obvious ambiguity of the term 'history' is one that has often
been noticed, and there is nothing 'fuzzy' about it. It evinces itself in that
this term may mean the 'historical actuality' as weIl as the possible science
of it. We shall provisionally eliminate the signification of 'history' in the
sense ofa "science of history" (historiology).
The expression 'history' has various significations with which one has
in view neither the science of history nor even history as an Object, but
this very entity itself, not necessarily Objectified. Among such significations, that in which this entityis understood as somethingpast, maywell be
the pre-eminent usage. This signification is evinced in the kind of talk in
which we say that something or other "already belongs to history". Here
'past' means "no longer present-at-hand", or even "still present-at-hand
indeed, but without having any 'effect' on the 'Present' ". Of course, the
historical as that which is past has also the opposite signification, when
we say, "One cannot get away from history." Here, by "history", we have
in view that which is past, but which nevertheless is still having effects.
Howsoever the historical, as that which is past, is understood to be related
to the 'Present' in the sense of what is actual 'now' and 'today', and to be
related to it, either positively or privatively, in such a way as to have
effects upon it. Thus 'the past' has a remarkable double meaning; the
past belongs irretrievably to an earlier time; it belonged to the events of
that time; and in spite of that, it can still be present-at-hand 'now'-for
instance, the remains of a Greek temple. With the temple, a 'bit of the
past' is still 'in the present'.
What we next have in mind with the term "history" is not so much
'the past' in the sense of that which is past, but rather derivation [Herkunft] from such a pasto Anything that 'has a history' stands in the context
of a becoming. In such becoming, 'development' is sometimes arise,
sometimes a falI. What 'has a history' in this way can, at the same time,
'make' such history. As 'epoch-making', it determines 'a future' 'in the
present'. Here "history" signifi<;s a 'context' of events and 'effects', which
379 draws on through 'the past', the 'Present', and the 'future'. On this view,
the past has no special priority.
Further, "history" signifies the totality of those entities which change
'in time', and indeed the transformations and vicissitudes of men, of
human groupings and their 'cultures', as distinguished from Nature, which

II. 5
Being and Time
43 1
likewise operates 'in time'. Here what one has in view is not so much a
kind of Being-historizing-as it is that realm of entities which one
distinguishes from Nature by having regard for the way in which man's
existence is essentially determined by 'spirit' and 'culture', even though
in a certain manner Nature too belongs to "history" as thus understood.
FinaIly, whatever has been handed down to us is as such held to be 'historical', whether it is something which we know historiologically, or something that has been taken over as self-evident, with its derivation hidden.
If we take these four significations together, the upshot is that history
is that specific historizing of existent Dasein which cornes to pass in time,
50 that the historizing which is 'past' in our Being-with-one-another, and
which at the same time has been 'handed down to us' and is continuingly
effective, is regarded as "history" in the sense that gets emphasized.
The four significations are connected in that they relate to man as the
'subject' of events. How is the historizing character of such events to be
defined? Is historizing a sequence of processes, an ever-changing emergence and disappearance of events? In what way does this historizing of
history belong to Dasein? Is Dasein already factically 'present-at-hand'
to begin with, so that on occasion it can get 'into a history'? Does Dasein
first become historical by getting intertwined with events and circumstances? Or is the Being of Dasein constituted first of aIl by historizing, so
that anything like circUInstances, events, and vicissitudes is ontologically
possible only because Dasein is historical in its Being? Why is it that the
function of the past gets particularly stressed when the Dasein which
historizes 'in time' is characterized 'temporally'?
Ifhistory belongs to Dasein's Being, and this Being is based on temporality, then it would be easy to begin the existential analysis ofhistoricality
with those characteristics of the historical which obviously have a temporal
meaning. Therefore, by characterizing more precisely the remarkably
privileged position of the 'past' in the concept ofhistory, we shall prepare
the way for expounding the basic constitution of historicality.
The 'antiquities' preserved in museums (household gear, for example)
belong to a 'time which is past'; yet they are still present-at-hand in the
'Present'. How far is such equipment historical, when it is not yet past? Is
it historical, let us say, only because it has become an object of historiological interest, of antiquarian study or national lore? But such equipment can be a historiological object only because it is in itself somehow
historical. We repeat the question: by what right do we calI this entity
"historical", when it is not yet past? Or do these 'Things' have 'in
themselves' 'something past', even though they are still present-at-hand
today? Then are these, which are. present-at-hand, still what they were?

380

381

432
Being and Time
II. 5
Manifestly these 'Things' have altered. The gear has become fragile or
worm-eaten 'in the course of time'. But that specific character of the past
which makes it something historical, does not lie in this transience, l which
continues even during the Being-present-at-hand of the equipment in the
museum. What, then, is past in this equipment? What were these 'Things'
which today they are no longer? They are still definite items ofequipment
for use; but they are out of use. Suppose, however, that they were still in
use today, like many a household heirloom; would they then be not yet
historical? AlI the same, whether they are in use or out of use, they are no
longer what they were. What is 'past'? Nothing else than that world
within which they belonged to a context of equipment and were encountered as ready-to-hand and used by a concernful Dasein who was-inthe-world. That world is no longer. But what was formerly within-the-world
with respect to that world is still present-at-hand. As equipment belonging to a world, that which is now still present-at-hand can belong
nevertheless to the 'past'. But what do we signify by saying of a world that
it is no longer? A world is only in the manner of existing Dasein, which
factically i s as Being-in-the-world. 2
Thus the historical character of the antiquities that are still preserved
is grounded in the 'past' of that Dasein to whose world they be1onged.
But according to this, only 'past' Dasein would be historical, not Dasein
'in the present'. However, can Dasein be past at alI, ifwe define 'past' as
'now no longer either present-at-hand or ready-to-hand'? Manifestly, Dasein can
never be past, not because Dasein is non-transient, but because it essentiaily
can never be present-at-hand. Rather, if it is, it exists. A Dasein which no
longer exists, however, is not past, in the ontologically strict sense; it is
rather "having-been-there" [da-gewesen]. The antiquities which are still
present-at-hand have a character of 'the past' and of history by reason of
the fact that they have be10nged as equipment to a world that has beenthe world of a Dasein that has been there-and that they have been
derived from that world. This Dasein is what is primarily historical. But
does Dasein first become historical in that it is no longer there? Or is it not
historical precisely in so far as it factically exists? Is Dasein just something
that "has been" in the sense of"having been there", or has it been as something
futural which is making present-that is to say, in the temporaliâng ofits temporality?
From this provisional analysis of equipment which belongs to history
and which is still present-at-hand though somehow 'past', it becomes
plain that such entities are historical only by reason of their belonging to
the world. But the world has an historical kind of Being because it makes
1 'Verganglichkeit', Cf. 'vergehen' ('ta pass away') and 'Vergangenheit' ('the past').
2 'Welt ist nur in der Weise des existierenden Daseins, das aIs In-der-We1t-seinfaktisch ist.'

Il. 5
Being and Time
433
up an ontological attribute of Dasein. It may be shown further that when
one designates a time as 'the past', the meaning of this is not unequivocal;
but 'the past' is manifestly distinct from one's having been, with which
we have become acquainted as something constitutive for the ecstatical
unity of Dasein's temporality. This, however, only makes the enigma
ultimately more acute; why is it that the historical is determined predominantly by the 'past', or, to speak more appropriately, by the character
of having-been, when that character is one that temporalizes itself
equiprimordially with the Present and the future?
We contend that what is primarily historical is Dasein. That which is
secondarily historical, however, is what we encounter within-the-worldnot only equipment ready-to-hand, in the widest sense, but also the
environing Nature as 'the very soil of history.' Entities other than Dasein
which are historical by reason ofbelonging to the world, are what we calI
'world-historical'. It can be shown that the ordinary conception of 'worldhistory' arises precisely from our orientation to what is thus secondarily
historical. World-historical entities do not first get their historical character, let us say, by reason of an historiological Objectification; they get it
rather as thase entities which t~y are in themselves when they are encountered within-the-world.
In analysing the historical character ofequipment which is still presentat-hand, we have not only been led back to Dasein as that which is
primarily historical; but at the same time we have been made to doubt
whether the temporal characterization of the historical in general may be
oriented primarily to the Being-in-time of anything present-at-hand.
Entities do not become 'more historical' by being moved off into a past
which is always farther and farther away, so that the oldest ofthem would
be the most authentically historical. On the other hand, if the 'temporal'
distance from "now and today" is of no primary constitutive significance
for the historicality of entities that are authentically historical, this is not 382
because these entities are not 'in time' and are timeless, but because they
exist temporally in so primordial a manner that nothing present-at-hand 'in
time', whether passing away or still coming along, could ever-by its
ontological essence-be temporal in such a way.
It will be said that these deliberations have been rather petty. No one
denies that at bottom human Dasein is the primary 'subject' of history;
and the ordinary conception of history, which we have cited, says so
plainly enough. But with the thesis that 'Dasein is historical', one has in
view not just the ontical Fact that in man we are presented with a more
or less important 'atom' in the workings of world-history, and that he
remains the plaything of circumstances and events. This thesis raises the

434
Being and Time
II. 5
problem: to what extent and on the basis of what ontological conditions, does
historicality belong, as an essential constitutive state, to the subjectivity of the
'historical' subject?
~ 74. The Basic Constitution of Historicality

383

Dasein factically has its 'history', and it can have something of the sort
because the Being of this entity is constituted by historicality. We must
now justify this thesis, with the aim of expounding the ontological problem
of history as an existential one. The Being of Dasein has been defined
as care. Care is grounded in temporality. Within the range oftemporality,
therefore, the kind of historizing which gives existence its definitely
historical character, must be sought. Thus the Interpretation of Dasein's
historicality will prove to be, at bottom, just a more concrete working out
of temporality. We first revealed temporality with regard to that way of
existing authentically which we characterized as anticipatory resoluteness. How far does this imply an authentic historizing of Dasein?
We have defined "resoluteness" as a projecting of oneself upon one's
own Being-guilty-a projecting which is reticent and ready for anxiety.lv
Resoluteness gains its authenticity as anticipatory resoluteness. v In this,
Dasein understands itself with regard to its potentiality-for-Being, and it
does so in such a manner that it will go right under the eyes of Death in
order thus to take over in its thrownness that entity which it is itself' and
to take it over wholly. The resolute taking over of one's factical 'there',
signifies, at the same time, that the Situation is one which has been
resolved upon. In the existential analysis we cannot, in principle, discuss
what Dasein factically resolves in any particular case. Our investigation
excludes even the existential projection of the factical possibilities of
existence. Nevertheless, we must ask whence, in general, Dasein can draw
those possibilities upon which it factically projects itself. One's anticipatory projection of oneself on that possibility of existence which is not to be
outstripped~n death-guarantees only the totality and authenticity of
one's resoluteness. But those possibilities of existence which have been
factically disclosed are not to be gathered from death. And this is stililess
the case when one's anticipation of this possibility does not signify that
one is speculating about it, but signifies precisely that one is coming back
to one's factical "there". Will taking over the thrownness of the Self into
its world perhaps disclose an horizon from which existence snatches its
factical possibilities away?l Have we not said in addition that Dasein
never cornes back behind its thrownness ?vl Before we decide too quickly
l 'So11 etwa die Obemahme der Geworfenheit des SeIbst in seine WeIt einen Horizont
erschliessen, dem die Existenz ihre faktischen Moglichkeiten entreisst?'

Il. 5
Being and Time
435
whether Dasein draws it authentic possibilities of existence from thrownness or not, we must assure ourselves that we have a full conception of
thrownness as a basic attribute of care.
As thrown, Dasein has indeed been delivered over to itself and to its
potentiality-for-Being, but as Being-in-the-world. As thrown, it has been
submitted to a 'world', and exists factically with Others. Proximally and
for the most part the Self is lost in the "they". It understands itself in
terms of those possibilities of existence which 'circulate' in the 'average'
public way of interpreting Dasein today. These possibilities have mostly
been made unrecognizable by ambiguity; yet they are weIl known to us.
The authentic existentiell understanding is so far from extricating itself
from the way of interpreting Dasein which bas come down to us, that in
each case it is in terms of this interpretation, against it, and yet again for
it, that any possibility one has chosen is seized upon in one's resolution.
The resoluteness in which Dasein cornes back to itself, discloses CUITent
factical possibilities of authentic existing, and discloses them in terms of the
heritage which that resoluteness, as thrown, talces over. In one's coming back
resolutely to one's thrownness, there is hidden a handing down to oneself of
the possibilities that have come down to one, but not necessarily as having
thus come down. 1 If everything 'good' is a heritage, and the character of
'goodness' lies in making authentic existence possible, then the handing
down ofa heritage constitutes itselfin resoluteness. The more authentically
Dasein resolves-and this means that in anticipating death it understands
itself unambiguously in terms of its ownmost distinctive possibility-the
more unequivocally does it choose and find the possibility of its existence,
and the less does it do so by accident. Only by the anticipation of death
is every accidentaI and 'provisional' possibility driven out. Only Beingfree for death, gives Dasein its goal outright and pushes existence into
its finitude. Once one has grasped the finit~de of one's existence, it
snatches one back from the endless multiplicity ofpossibilities which offer
themselves as closest to one-those of comfortableness, shirking, and
taking things lightly-and brings Dasein into the simplicity of its fate
[Schicksals]. This is how we designate Dasein's primordial historizing,
which lies in authentic resoluteness and in which Dasein hands itself
down to itself, free for death, in a possibility which it has inherited and
yet has chosen.
l'Die Entschlossenheit, in der das Dasein auf sich selbst zurückkommt, erschliesst die
jeweiligen faktischen Moglichkeiten eigentlichen Existierens f!us dem Erbe, .das. sie ~
geworfene übernimmt. Das entschlossene Zurückkommen auf die Geworfenhelt blrgt em
Sichüberliefern überkommener Moglichkeiten in sich, obzwar nicht notwendig ais
überkommener.' The grammatical structure of both sentences is ambiguous. Notice also
the counterpoint of the verbs 'zurückkommen', 'üherkommen', 'üherliefem', 'übernehmen,' which c~ot he reproduced in translation.

38 4-

38 5

436
Being and Time
II. 5
. Dasein can be reached by the blows of fate only because in the depths
ofits Being Dasein is fate in the sense we have described. Existing fatefully
in the resoluteness which hands itself down, Dasein has been disclosed as
Being-in-the-world both for the 'fortunate' circumstances which 'come its
way' and for the cruelty of accidents. Fate does J;lot first arise from the
clashing together of events and circumstances. Even one who is irresolute
gets driven about by these-more so than one who has chosen; and yet he
can 'have' no fate. 1
IfDasein, by anticipation, lets death become powerful in itself, then, as
free for death, Dasein understands itself in its own superior power, the
power of its finite freedom, so that in this freedom, which "is' only in its
having chosen to make such a choice, it can take over the powerlessness of
abandonment to its having done so, and can thus come to have a clear
vision for the accidents of the Situation that has been disclosed. B But Ü
fateful Dasein, as Being-in-the-world, exists essentially in Being-with
Others, its historizing is a co-historizing and is determinative for it as
destiny [Geschick]. This is how we designate the historizing of the community, of a people. Destiny is not something that puts itself together out
of individual fates, any more than Being-with-one-another can be conceived as the occurring together of several Subjects.vu Our fates have
already been guided in advance, in our Being with one another in the same
world and in our resoluteness for definite possibilities. Only in communicating and in struggling does the power of destiny become free. Dasein's
fateful destiny in and with its 'generation'vlii goes to make up the full
authentic historizing of Dasein.
Fate is that powerless superior power which puts itself in readiness for
adversities-the power of projecting oneself upon one's own Being-guilty,
and ofdoing so reticently, with readiness for anxiety. As such, fate requires
1 This statement MaY weil puzzle the English.speaking reader, who would perhaps he
less troubled if he were to read that the irresolute man can have no 'destiny'. As we shaH
see in the next paragraph, Heidegger has chosen to differentiate sharply between the
words 'Schicksal' and 'Geschick', which are ordinarily synonyms. Thus 'Schicksal' (our
'fate') might he described as the 'destiny' of the resolute individual; 'Geschick' (our
'destiny') is rather the 'destiny' of a larger group, or of Dasein as a member of such a
group. This usage of 'Geschick' is probably to be distinguished from that which we have
met on H. 16, 19, and perhaps even 379, where we have preferred to translate it by
'vicissitude'. The suggestion of an etymological connection between 'Schicksal' and
'Geschick' on the one hand and 'Geschichte' (our 'history') and 'Geschehen' (our 'historizing') on the other, which is exploited in the next paragraph, is of course 100t in
translation.
a 'Wenn das Dasein vorlaufend den Tod in sich machtig werden liisst, versteht es sich,
frei für ibn, in der eigenen Vbermacht seiner endlichen Freiheit, um in dieser, die je nur
"ist" im Gewahlthaben der Wahl, die Ohnmaeht der überlassenheit an es selbst zu
übernehmen und für die ZufaJle der erschlossenen Situation hellsichtig zu werden.' It
should perhaps be pointed out that 'Ohnmacht' cao also Mean a 'faint' or a 'swoon', and
that 'Hellsichtigkeit' is the regular term for 'clairvoyance'. Thus the German reader
might easily read into this passage a suggestion of the seer's mystical trance.

Il. 5

Being and Time
437
as the ontological condition for its possibility, the state of Being of carethat is to say, temporality. Only Ü death, guilt, conscience, freedom, and
finitude reside together equiprimordially in the Being of an entity as they
do in care, can that entity exist in the mode of fate; that is to say, only
then can it be historical in the very depths of its existence.
On[y an entiry which, in its Being, is essential[y Cutural so that it isfreeftr its
death and can let itseif be thrown back upon its factical "there" by shattering itseif
against death-that is to say, on[y an entiry which, as futural, is equiprimordial[y in
the process tifhaving-been, can, by handing down to itseif the possibiliry it kas
inherited, take over its own thrownness and be in the moment oC vision ftr
'its time'. On[y autkentic temporaliry which is at the same time finite, makes possible
something like fate-that is to say, authentic historicaliry.
It is not necessary that in resoluteness one should explicit{y know the
origin of the possibilities upon which that resoluteness projects itself. It is
rather in Dasein's temporality, andthere only, that there lies any possibility that the existentiell potentiality-for-Being upon which it projects
itself can be gleaned explicit{y from the way in which Dasein has been
traditionally understood. The resoluteness which comes back to itself and
hands itself down, then becomes the repetition of a possibility of existence
that has come down to us. Repeating is handing down explicit[y-that is to
say, going back into the possibilities of the Dasein that has-been-there. 1
The authentic repetition of a possibility of existence that has been-the
possibility that Dasein may choose its hero-is grounded existentially in
anticipatory resoluteness; for it is in resoluteness that one first chooses the
choice which makes one free for the struggle of loyally following in the
footsteps of that which can be repeated. But when one has, by repetition,
handed down to oneself a possibility that has been, the Dasein that basbeen-there is not disclosed in order to be actualized over again. The
repeating ofthat which is possible does not bring again [Wiederbringen]
something that is 'past', nor does it bind the 'Present' back to that which 386
has already been 'outstripped'. Arising, as it does, from a resolute projection of oneself, repetition does not let itself be persuaded of something
by what is 'past', just in order that this, as something which was formerly
l'Die Wiederholung ist die ausdrücklich4 Vberliejerung, das heisst, der Rückgang in Maglichkeiten des dagewesenen Daseins'. (In the earlier editions the article 'Die', as weil as
the words now italicized, appears in spaced type.)
While we usually translate 'wiederholen' as 'repeat', this English word is hardly
adequate to express Heidegger's meaning. Etymologically, 'wiederholen' means 'to fetch
apin'; in modern German usage, however, this, is expressed by the cognate separable
verb 'wieder ... holen', while 'wiederholen' means simply 'to repeat' or 'do over again'.
Heidegger departs from both these meanings, as\he is careful to point out. For him,
'wiederholen' does not Mean either a Mere mechanical r~petition or an attempt to recon.
stitute the physical past; it means rather an attempt to go back to the past and retrieve
former possibilities, which are thus 'explicitly handed down' or 'transmitted'.

43 8
Being and Time
II. 5
actual, may recul'. Rather, the repetition makes a reciprocative rejoiruIer to
the possibility of that existence which has-been-there. But when such a
rejoinder is made to this possibility in a resolution, it is made in a moment
of vision; and as such it is at the same time a disavowal of that which in
the "today", is working itselfout as the 'past'.1 Repetition does not abandon
itself to that which is past, nor does it aim at progress. In the moment
of vision authentic existence is indifferent to both these alternatives.
We characterize repetition as a mode ofthat resoluteness which hands
itself down-the mode by which Dasein exists explicitly as fate. But if
fate constitutes the primordial historicality of Dasein, then history has its
essential importance neither in what is past no1' in the "today" and its
'connection' with whatis past, but in that authentic historizing ofexistence
which arises from Dasein'sfuture. As a way ofBeing for Dasein, history has
its roots so essentiaIly in the future that death, as that possibility of Dasein
which we have already characterized, throws anticipatory existence back
upon its factical thrownness, and so for the first time imparts to havingbeen its peculiarly privileged position in the historical. Authentic Beingtowards-death-that is to say, the finitude of temporality-is the hidden basis of
Dasein's historicality. Dasein does not first become historical in repetition;
but because it is historical as temporal, it can take itself over in its history
by repeating. For this, no historiology is as yet needed.
Resoluteness implies handing oneself down by anticipation to the
"there" of the moment of vision; and this handing down we caIl "fate".
This is also the ground for destiny, by which we understand Dasein's
historizing in Being-with Others. In repetition, fateful destiny can be disclosed explicitlyas bound upwith the heritagewhich has come down to us.
By repetition, Dasein first has its own history made manifest. Historizing is
itself grounded existentiaIly in the fact that Dasein, as temporal, is open
ecstaticaIly; so too is the disc10sedness which belongs to historizing, or
rather so too is the way in which we make this disclosedness our own.
That which we have hitherto been characterizing as "historicality" to
conform with the kind of historizing which lies in anticipatory resoluteness, we now designate as Dasein's "authentic historicality". From the
phenomena of handing down and repeating, which are rooted in the
l'Die Wiederholung liisst sich, einem entschlossenen Sichentwerfen entspringend,
nicht vom "Vergangenen" überreden, um es ais das vonnals Wirkliche nur wiederkehren zu lasse.l. Die Wiederholung erwidert vielmehr die Moglichkeit der dagewesenen
Existenz. Die Erwiderung der Miiglichkeit im Entschluss ist aber zugleich ais augenblickliche der WideTruf dessen, was in Heute sich ais "Vergangenheit" auswirkt.' The idea
seems to be that in resolute repetition one is having, as it were, a conversation with the
past, in which the past proposes certain possibilities for adoption, but in which one makes
a rejoinder to this proposai by 'reciprocating' with the proposai of other possibilities as a
sort of rebuke to the past, which one now disavows. (The punning treatment of 'wieder'
and 'wider' is presumably intentional.)

II. 5
Being and Time
439
future, it has become plain why the historizing of authentic history lies
preponderantly in having been. But it remains aIl the more enigmatic in
what way this historizing, as fate, is to constitute the whole 'connectedness' ofDasein from its birth to its death. How can recourse to resoluteness
bring us any enlightenment? Is not each resolution just one more single
'Experience' in the sequence of the whole connectedness of our Experiences? Is the 'connectedness' ofauthentic historizing to consist, let us say,
of an uninterrupted sequence of resolutions? Why is it that the question
of how the 'connectedness of life' is Constituted finds no adequate and
satisfying answer? Is not our investigation overhasty? Does it not, in the
end, hang too much on the answer, without fust having tested the legitimacy of the question? Nothing is so plain from the course of the existential
analytic so far, as the Fact that the ontology of Dasein is always falling
back upon the allurements of the way in which Being is ordinarily understood. The only way of encountering this fact methodologically is by
studying the source of the question of how Dasein's connectedness is Constituted, no matter how 'obvious' this question may be, and by dete1'mining
within what ontological horizon it moves.
If historicality belongs to the Being of Dasein, then even inauthentic
existing must be historical. What if it is Dasein's inauthentic historicality
that has directed our questioning to the 'connectedness of life' and has
blocked off our access to authentic historicality and its own peculiar 'connectedness'? However this may be treated, we cannot do without a study
of Dasein's inauthentic historicality if our exposition of the ontological
problem of history is to be adequate and complete.

38 7

~ 75. Dasein's Historicality, and World-history

Proximally and for the most part, Dasein understands itself in terms of
that which it encounters in the environment and that with which it is
circumspectively concerned. This understanding is not just a bare taking
Cognizance of itself, such as accompanies all Dasein's ways of behaving.
Understanding signifies one's projecting oneself upon one's current
possibility of Being-in-the-world; that is to say, it signifies existing as this
possibility. Thus understanding, as common sense, constitutes even the
inauthentic existence of the "they". When we are with one another in
public, our everyday concern does not encounterjust equipment and work;
it likewise encounters what is 'given' along with these: 'affairs', under- 388
takings, incidents, mishaps. The 'world' belongs to everyday trade and
traillc as the soil from which they grow and the arena where they are displayed. When we are with one another in public, the Others are encountered
in activity of such a kind that one is 'in the swim' with it 'oneself'.

389

440
Being and Time
II. 5
One is acquainted with it, discusses it, encourages it, combats it, retains
it, and forgets it, but one always does so primarily with regard to what is
getting done and what is 'going to come ofit' [was • •• "herausspringt"].
We compute the progress which the individual Dasein has made-his
stoppages, readjustments, and 'output'; and we do so proximally in terms
of that with which he is concerned-its course, its status, its changes, its
availability. No matter how trivial it may be to allude to the way in
which Dasein is understood in everyday common sense, ontologically this
understanding is by no means transparent. But in that case, why should
not Dasein's 'connectedness' be defined in terms of what it is concerned
with, and what it 'Experiences'? Do not equipment and work and every
thing which Dasein dwells alongside, belong to 'history' too? If not, is
the historizing of history just the isolated running-off of 'streams of
Experience' in individual subjects?
'
Indeed history is neither the connectedness of motions in the alterations
of Objects, nor a free-floating sequence of Experiences which 'subjects'
have had. Does the historizing of history then pertain to the way subject
and Object are 'linked together'? Even if one assigns [zuweist] historizing
to the subject-Object relation, we then have to ask what kind of Being
belongs to this linkage as such, if this is what basically 'historizes'. The
thesis of Dasein's historicality does not say that the worldless subject is
historical, but that what is historical is the entity that exists as Being-inthe-world. The historizing of history is the historizing of Being-in-the-world.
Dasein's historicality is essentially the historicality of the world, which, on
the basis ofecstatico-horizontal temporality, belongs to the temporalizing of
that temporality. In so far as Dasein exists facticalIy, it already encounters
that which has been discovered within-the-world. With the existence of
historical Being-in-the-world, what is ready-to-hand and what is presmt-at-hand
have already, in every case, bem incorporated into the history of the world. Equipment and work-for instance, books-have their 'fates'; buildings and
institutions have their history:---xnd even Nature is historical. It is not
historical, to be sure, in so far as we speak of 'natural history';lx but
Nature is historical as a countryside, as an area that has been colonized
or exploited, as a battlefield, or as the site of a cult. These entities withinthe-world are historical as such, and their history does not signify something 'external' which merely accompanies the 'inner' history of the
'soul'. We calI such entities "the world-historical". Here we must notice
that the expression 'world-history; which W~ have chosen and which is
here understood ontologicalIy, has a double signification. The expression
signifies, for one thing, the historizing of the world in its essential existent
unity with Dasein. At the same time, we have here in view the 'historizing'

Il. 5

Being and Time
44 1
within-the-world of what is ready-to-hand and present-at-hand, in so far
as entities within-the-world are, in every case, discovered with the
factically existent world. The historical world is factical only as the world
of entities within-the-world. That which 'happens' with equipment and
work as such has its own character of movement, and this character has
been completely obscure up till now. When, for instance, a ring gets
'handed over' to someone and 'worn', this is a kind of Being in which it
does not simply suffer changes of location. The movement of historizing
in which something 'happens to something' is not to be grasped in
terms of motion as change of location. This holds for all worldhistorical 'processes' and events, and even, in a certain manner, for
'natural catastrophes'. Quite apart from the fact that if we were to follow
up the problem of the ontological structure ofworld-historical historizing,
we would necessarily be transgressing the limits of our theme, we can
refrain from this all the more because the very aim of this exposition is to
lead us face to face with the ontological enigma of the movement of
historizing in general.
We need only delimit that phenomenal range which we necessarily
must also have in view ontologically when we talk of Dasein's historicality. The transcendence of the world has a temporal foundation; and by
reason of this, the world-historical is, in every case, already 'Objectively'
there in the historizing of existing Being-in-the-world, without being
grasped historiologically. And because factical Dasein, in falling, is absorbed
in that with which it concerns itself, it understands its history worldhistorically in the first instance. And because, further, the ordinary
understanding of Being understands 'Being' as presence-at-hand without
further differentiation, the Being of the world-historical is experienced
and interpreted in the sense of something present-at-hand which comes
along, has presence, and then disappears. And finalIy, because the meaning of Being in general is held to be something simply self-evident, the
question about the kind of Being of the world-historical and about the
movement of historizing in general has 'really' just the barren circumstantiality ofa verbal sophistry.
Everyday Dasein has been dispersed into the many kinds of things
which daily 'come to pass'. The opportunities and circumstances which
concern keeps 'tactically' awaiting in advance, have 'fate' as their outcome. In terms ofthat with which inauthentically existing Dasein concerns
itself, it first computes its history. In so doing, it is driven about by its
'affairs'. So if it wants to come to itself, it must first pull itselftogether1 from
the dispersion and disconnectedness of the very things that have 'come to
l

'zusammenholen'. The older editions have 'zusammen holen'.

390

39 1

442
Being and Time
II. 5
pass'; and because of this, it is only then that there at last arises from the
horizon of the understanding which belongs to inauthentic historicality,
the question of how one is to establish a 'connectedness' of Dasein if one
does so in the sense of 'Experiences' of a subject-Experiences which are
'also' present-at-hand. The possibility that this horizon for the question
should be the dominant one is grounded in the irresoluteness which goes
to make up the essence of the Self's in-constancy.
We have thus pointed out the source of the question of the 'connectedness' of Daein in the sense of the unitY with which Experiences are
linked together between birth and death. At the same time, the origin of
this question betrays that it is an inappropriate one ifwe are aiming at a
primordial existential Interpretation of Dasein's totality of historizing. On
the other hand, despite the predominance of this 'natural' horizon for such
questions, it becomes explicable why Dasein's authentic historicalityfate and repetition-looks as if it, least ofaIl, could supply the phenomenal
basis for bringing into the shape of an ontologically grounded problem
what is at bottom intended in the question of the 'connectedness' oflife.
This question does not ask how Dasein gains such a unity ofconnectedness that the sequence of 'Experiences' which has ensued and is still
ensuing can subsequently be linked together; it asks rather in which of its
own kinds of Being Dasein loses itself in such a manner l that it must, as it were,
only subsequently pull itself together out of its dispersal, and think up for itself a
uniry in which that "together" is embraced. Our lostness in the "they" and in
the world-historical has earlier been revealed as a fleeing in the face of
death. Such fleeing makes manifest that Being-towards-death is a basic
attribute of care. Anticipatory resoluteness brings this Being-towardsdeath into authentic existence. The historizing of this resoluteness,
however, is the repetition of the heritage of possibilities by handing these
down to oneself in anticipation; and we have Interpreted this historizing
as authentic historicality. Is perhaps the whole of existence stretched
along in this historicality in a way which is primordial and not lost, and
which has no need of connectedness? The Self's resoluteness against the
inconstancy ofdistraction, is in itselfa steadiness which has been stretched along
-the steadiness with which Dasein as fate 'incorporates' into its existence
birth and death and their 'between', and holds them as thus 'incorporated', so that in such constancy Dasein is indeed in a moment of vision for
what is world-historical in its current Situation. 2 In the fateful repetition
~ :. ',' verlieTt es sich so,' • .' The older editi?llS have '... verliert des sich nicht so •. .'
Die. Entschlossen~e,lt d,es ~elbst gegen die ,unstandigkeit der Zerstreuung ist in sich

selbst die eTstreckte Statlgkelt, m der das Dasem aIs Schicksal Geburt und Tod in ihr
"Zwisc~en': in ~ein~, Existenz "einbez~gen': haIt, ~o zwar, dass es in solcher Standigkeit
augcnbhckhch !st fur das Welt-geschlchthche semer jeweiligen Situation.' The noun

Il. 5
Being and Time
443
of possibilities that have been, Dasein brings itself back 'immediately'that is to say, in away that is temporally ecstatical-to what already has
been before it. But when its heritage is thus handed down to itself, its
'birth' is caught up into its existence in coming back from the possibility of
death (the possibility which is not to be outstripped), if only so that this
existence may accept the thrownness of its own "there" in a way which is
more free from Illusion. l
Resoluteness constitutes the loyalry of existence to its own Self. As
resoluteness which is ready for anxiery, this loyalty is at the same time a
possible way of revering the sole authority which a free existing can have
-of revering the repeatable possibilities of existence. Resoluteness would
be misunderstood ontologically if one were to suppose that it would be
actual as 'Experience' only as long as the 'act' of resolving 'lasts'. In
resoluteness lies the existentiell constancy which, by its very essence, has
alreadyanticipated [vorweggenommen] every possible moment of vision
that may arise from it. As fate, resoluteness is freedom to give up sorne
definite resolution, and ta give it up in accordance with the demands of
sorne possible Situation or other. The steadiness Qf.existence is not interrupted thereby but confirmed in the moment of vision. This steadiness is
not first formed either through or by the adjoining of 'moments' one to
another; but these arise from the temporality of that repetition which is
futurally in the process-of-having-been-a temporality which has already
been stretehed along.
In inauthentic historicality, on the other hand, the way in which fate
bas been primordially stretched along has been hidden. With the inconstancy of the they-self Dasein makes present its 'today'. In awaiting the
next new thing, it has already forgotten the old one. The "they" evades
choice. Blind for possibilities, it cannot repeat what has been, but only
retains and receives the 'actual' that is left over, the world-historical that
bas been, the leavings, and the information about them that is presentat-hand. Lost in the making present of the "today", it understands the
'past' in terms of the 'Present'. On the other hand, the temporality of
authentic historicality, as the moment ofvision of anticipatory repetition,
'Statigkeit', which we here translate as 'steadiness', may mean either 'continuity' or
'refractoriness'. Heidegger may have bath senses in mind. Cf. our note 3, p. 475, H. 423
bclow.
l'Mit diesem Sichübcrliefem des Erbes aber ist dann die "Geburt" im Zurückkommen
aus der unüberholbaren Maglichkeit des Todes in die Existent eingtholt, damit diese
freilich nur die Geworfenheit des eigenen Da illusionsfreier hinnehme.' Here as in H. 307
and perhaps in H. 302, Heidegger seems to he exploiting the double meaning of 'einholen' as 'to bring in' and 'to catch up with'. Dasem 'brings' its birth cinto' its existence
by accepting its heritage of possibilities, and in this way it 'catches up with it'. Thus while
death cannot he outstripped ('überholt'), birth can at least he 'caught up with' ('eingehoIt').

39 2

444
Being and Time
II. 5
deprives the "today" of its character as present, l and weans one from the
conventionalities of the "they". When, however, one's existence is
inauthentically historical, it is loaded down with the legacy of a 'past'
which has become unrecognizable, and it seeks the modem. But when
historicality is authentic, it understands history as the 'recurrence' of the
possible, and knows that a possibility will recur only if existence is open
for it fatefully, in a moment of vision, in resolute repetition.
The existential Interpretation of Dasein's historicality is constantly
gettingeclipsed unawares. The obscurities are all the harder to dispel when
we have not disentangled the possible dimensions of the appropriate
inquiry, and when everything is haunted by the enigma of Being, and, as
has now been made plain, by that of motion. 2 Nevertheless, we may venture
a projection of the ontological genesis of historiology as a science in terms
of Dasein's historicality. This projection will serve to prepare us for the
clarification of the task of destroying the history of philosophy historiologically-a clarification which is to be accomplished in what follows. x

of Historiology in Dasein's Historicality.
We need not discuss the Fact that historiology, like any science, is, as
a kind of Being of Dasein, factically 'dependent' at any time on the
'prevailing world-view'. Beyond this, we must inquire into the ontological
possibility ofhow the sciences have their source in Dasein's state ofBeing.
This source is still not very transparent. In the context which lies before
us, our analysis will acquaint us in outline with the existential source of
historiology only to the extent of bringing still more plainly to light the
.historicality of Dasein and the fact that this historicality is rooted in
temporality.
If Dasein's Being is in principle historical, then every factical science is
always manifestly in the grip of this historizing. But historiology still has
Dasein's historicality as its presupposition in its own quite special way.
This can be made plain, in the first instance, by the suggestion that
historiology, as the science of Dasein's history, must 'presuppose' as its
possible 'Object' the entity which is primordially historicaI. But history must
not only he, in order that a historiological object may become accessible;
and historiological cognition is not only historical, as a historizing way in
which Dasein comports itself. Whether the historiological disclosure of history
is factically accomplished or not, its ontological structure is such that in itself
this disclosure has its roots in the historicality of Dasein. This is the connection
we have in view when we talk of Dasein's historicality as the existential
~ 76. The Existential Source

l ' ••• eine Entgegenwiirtigung des Heute ...'

Il ' ••• und in allem das Riitsel des Seins und, wie jetzt deutlich wurde, der Bewegung

sein Wesen treibt.'

Il.5
Being and Time
445
source ofhistoriology. To cast light upon this connection signifies method- 393
ologically that the idea of historiology must be projected ontologically in
terms of Dasein's historicality. The issue here is not one of 'abstracting'
the concept of historiology from the way something is factically done in
the sciences today, nor is it one of assimilating it to anything of this sort.
For what guarantee dowe have in principle that such a factical procedure
will indeed be properly representative ofhistoriology in its primordial and
authentic possibilities? And even if this should turn out to be the case-we
shall hold back from any decision about this-then the concept could be
'discovered' in the Fact only by using the clue provided by the idea of
historiology as one which we have already understood. On the other
hand, the existential idea of historiology is not given a higher justification
by having the historian affirm that his factical behaviour is in agreement
with it. Nor does the idea become 'false' ifhe disputes anysuch agreement.
The idea of historiology as a science implies that the disclosure of
historical entities is what it has seized upon as its own task. Every science
is constituted primarily by thematizing. That which is familiar prescientifically in Dasein as disclosed Being-in-the-world, gets projected
upon the Being which is specific to it. With this projection, the realm of
entities is bounded off. The ways ofaccess to them get 'managed' methodologically, and the conceptual structure for interpreting them is outlined.
If we may postpone the question of whether a 'history of the Present' is
possible, and assign [zuweisen] to historiology the task of disclosing the
'past', then the historiological thematizing of history is possible only if, in
general, the 'past' has in each case already been disclosed. Quite apart
from the question of whether sufficient sources are available for the
historiological envisagement of the past, the way to it must in general be
open if we are to go back to it historiologically. It is by no means patent
that anything of the sort is the case, or how this is possible.
But in so far as Dasein's Being is historical-that is to say, in so far as by
reason of its ecstatico-horizonal temporality it is open in its character of
"having-been"-the way is in general prepared for such thematizing of
the 'past' as can be accomplished in existence. And because Dasein, and
only Dasein, is primordially historical, that which historiological thematizing presents as a possible object for research, must have the kind of Being
of Dasein which has-heen-there. Along with any factical Dasein as Being-inthe-world, there is also, in each case, world-history. If Dasein is there no
longer, then the world too is something that has-been-there. This is not
in conflict with the fact that, all the same, what was formerly ready-tohand within-the-world does not yet pass away, but becomes something 394that one can, in a Present, come across 'historiologically' as something

395

446
Being and Time
II. 5
which has not passed away and which belongs to the world that has-beenthere.
Remains, monuments, and records that are still present-at-hand, are
possible 'material' for the concrete disclosure of the Dasein which hasbeen-there. Such things can turn into historiological material only because,
in accordance with their own kind of Being, they have a world-historical
character. And they become such material only when they have been
understood in advance with regard to their within-the-world-ness. The
world that has already been projected is given a defùùte character by
way of an Interpretation of the world-historical material we have 'received'. Our going back to 'the past' does not first get its start from the
acquisition, sifting, and securing of such material; these activities presuppose histomal Being towards the Dasein that has-been-there-that is to
say, theypresuppose the historicality of the historian's existence. This is the
existential foundation for historiology as a science, even for its most
trivial and 'mechanical' procedures.xl
If historiology is rooted in historicality in this manner, then it is from
here that we must determine what the object of historiology 'really' is.
The delimitation of the primordial theme of historiology will have to be
carried through in conformity with the character ofauthentic historicality
and its disclosure of "what-has-been-there"-that is to say, in conformity
with repetition as this disclosure. In repetition the Daseinwhich has-beenthere is understood in its authentic possibility which has been. The
'birth' of historiology from authentic historicality therefore signifies that
in taking as our primary theme the historiological object we are projecting
the Dasein which has-been-there upon its ownmost possibility ofexistence.
Is historiology thus to have the possible for its theme? Does not its whole
'meaning' point solely to the 'facts'-to how something has factually
been?
But what does it signify to say that Dasein is 'factual'? If Dasein is
'really' actual only in existence, then its 'factuality' is constituted precisely by its resolute projection of itself upon a chosen potentiality-forBeing. But if so, that which authentically has-been-there 'factually' is the
existentiell possibility in which fate, destiny, and world-history have been
factically determined. Because in each case existence i s only as factically
thrown, historiology will disclose the quiet force of the possible with
greater penetration the more simply and the more concretely havingbeen-in-the-world is understood in terms of its possibility, and 'only'
presented as such.
If historiology, which itself arises from authentic historicality, reveals
by repetition the Dasein which has-been-there and reveals it in its

II. 5
Being and Time
447
possibility, then historiology has already made manifest the 'universal' in
the once-for-all. The question of whether the object of historiology is just
to put once-for-all 'individual' events into a series, or whether it also has
'laws' as its objects, is one that is radically mistaken. The theme of
historiology is neither that which has happened just once for all nor
something universal that floats above it, but the possibility which has
been factically existent. 1 This possibility does not get repeated as suchthat is to say, understood in an authentically historiological way-if it
becomes perverted into the colourlessness of a supratemporal model.
Only by historicality which is factical and authentic can the history of
what has-been-there, as a resolute fate, be disclosed in such a manner that
in repetition the 'force' of the possible gets struck home into one's factical
existence-in other words, that it comes towards that existence in its
futural character. The historicality of unhistoriological Dasein does not
take its departure from the 'Present' and from what is 'actual' only today,
in order to grope its way back from there to something that is past; and
neither does historiology. Even historiological disclosure temporalizes itself
in terms of the future. The 'selection' of what is to become a possible
object for historiology has already been met with in the factical existentiell
choice of Dasein's historicality, in which historiology first of all arises, and
in which alone it is.
The historiological disclosure of the 'past' is based on fateful repetition,
and is so far from 'subjective' that it alone guarantees the 'Objectivity'
of historiology. For the Objectivity of a science is regulated primarily in
terms of whether that science can confront us with the entity which
belongs to it as its theme, and can bring it, uncovered in the primordiality
ofits Being, to our understanding. In no science are the 'universal validity'
of standards and the claims to 'universality' which the "they" and its
common sense demand, less possible as criteria of 'truth' than in authentic
historiology.
Only because in each case the central theme of historiology is the
possibility of existence which has-been-there, and because the latter exists
factically in a way which is world-historical, can it demand of itself that
it takes its orientation inexorably from the 'facts'. Accordingly this
research as factical has many branches and takes for its object the history
of equipment, of work, of culture, of the spirit, and of ideas. As handing
itself down, history is, in itself, at the same time and in each case always
in an interpretedness which belongs to it, and which has a history of its
own; so for the most part it is only through traditional history that
• 1. 'Weder das nur einmalig Geschehene noch ein darüber schwebendes AlIgemeines
ut Ihr Thema, sondern die faktisch existent gewesene Moglichkeit.'

396

397

448
Being and Time
II. 5
historiology penetrates to what has-been-there itself. This is why concrete
historiological research can, in each case, maintain itself in varying doseness to its authentic theme. If the historian 'throws' himself straightway
into the 'world-view' of an era, he has not thus proved as yet that he
understands his object in an authentically historical way, and not just
'aesthetically'. And on the other hand, the existence of a historian who
'only' edits sources, may be characterized by a historicality which is
authentic.
Thus the very prevalence of a differentiated interest even in the most
remote and primitive cultures, is in itself no proof of the authentic historicality ofa 'time'. In the end, the emergence of a problem of 'historicism'
is the dearest symptom that historiology endeavours to alienate Dasein
from its authentic historicality. Such historicality does not necessarily
require historiology. It is not the case that unhistoriological eras as such
are unhistorical also.
The possibility that historiology in general can either be 'used' 'for
one's life' or 'abused' in it, is grounded on the fact that one's life is historical in the roots of its Being, and that therefore, as factically existing,
one has in each case made one's decision for authentic or inauthentic
historicality. Nietzsche recognized what was essential as to the 'use and
abuse of historiology for life' in the second of his studies "out of season"
(1874), and said it unequivocally and penetratingly. He distinguished
three kinds of historiology-the monumental, the antiquarian, and the
critical-without explicitly pointing out the necessity of this triad or the
ground of its unity. The threefold character of historiology is adumbrated in the
historicality of Dasein. At the same time, this historicality enables us to
understand to what extent these three possibilities must be united factically and concretely in any historiology which is authentic. Nietzsche's
division is not accidentaI. The beginning ofhis 'study' allows us to suppose
that he understood more than he has made known to us.
As historical, Dasein is possible only by reason of its temporality, and
temporality temporalizes itself in the ecstatico-horizonal unity of its
raptures. Dasein exists authentically as futural in resolutely disdosing a
possibility which it has chosen. Coming back resolutely to itself, it is, by
repetitipn, open for the 'monumental' possibilities of human existence.
The historiology which arises from such historicality is 'monumental'. As
in the process of having been, Dasein has been delivered over to its
thrownness. When the possible is made one's own by repetition, there is
adumbrated at the same time the possibility of reverently preserving the
existence that has-been-there, in which the possibility seized upon has
become manifest. Thus authentic historiology, as monumental, is

Il.5
Being and Time
449
'antiquarian' too. Dasein temporalizes itselfin the way the future and having
been are united in the Present. The Present disdoses the "today" authentically, and of course as the moment of vision. But in so far as this "today"
has been interpreted in terms of understanding a possibility of existence
which has been seized upon-an understanding which is repetitive in
a futural manner-authentic historiology becomes a way in which the
"today" gets deprived of its character as present; in other words, it
becomes a way of painfully detaching oneself from the falling publicness
of the 'today". As authentic, the historiology which is both monumental
and antiquarian is necessarily a critique of the 'Present'. Authentic
historicality is the foundation for the possibility of uniting these three
ways of historiology. But the ground on which authentic historiology is
founded is temporality as the existential meaning of the Being of care.
The existential-historical source of historiology may be presented
concretely by analysing the thematization which is constitutive for this
science. In historiological thematizing, the main point is the cultivation
of the hermeneutical Situation which-once the historically existent
Dasein has made its resolution-opens itself to the repetitive disdosure of
what has-been-there. The possibility and the structure of historiological
truth are to be expounded in terms of the authentic disclosedness ('truth') of
historical existence. But since the basic concepts of the historiological sciences
-whether they pertain to the Objects of these sciences or to the way in
which these are treated-are concepts of existence, the theory of the
humane science presupposes an existential Interpretation which has as
its theme the historicality of Dasein. Such an Interpretation is the constant
goal to which the researches of Wilhelm Dilthey seek to bring us doser,
and which gets illurnined in a more penetrating fashion by the ideas of
Count Yorck von Wartenburg.

1f 77· The Connection of the Foregoing Exposition of the Problem of Historicality
with the Researches of Wilhelm Dilthey and the ldeas of Count rorck 1
The analysis of the problem of history which we have just carried
through has arisen in the process of appropriating the labours of Dilthey.
It has been corroborated and at the same time strengthened, by the
theses of Count Yorck, which are found scattered through his letters to
him.xu
The image of Dilthey which is still widely disseminated today is that of
the 'sensitive' interpreter of the history of the spirit, especially the history
1 In this section we have relaxed sorne of our usuai conventions in view of the special
~tylistic character of the quotations frorn Count Yorck and Heidegger's own minor

m.consistencies in punctuation. In particuIar, we shaH now translate 'Historie' as 'History'
Wlth a capital 'H', rather than as 'historiology.'

399

450
Being and Time
II. 5
of literature, who 'also' endeavours to distinguish between the natural and
the humane sciences, thereby assigning [zuweist] a distinctive raIe to the
history of the latter group and likewise to 'psychology', then allowing the
whole to merge together in a relativistic 'philosophy of life'. Considered
superficially, this sketch is 'correct'. But the 'substance' eludes it, and it
covers up more than it reveals.
We may divide Dilthey's researches schematically into three domains:
studies on the theory of the humane sciences, and the distinction between
these and the natural sciences; researches into the history of the sciences of
man, society, and the state; endeavours towards a psychology in which the
'whole fact of man' is to be presented. Investigations in the theory of
science, in historical science, and in psychological hermeneutics are constantly permeating and intersecting each other. Where any one point of
view predominates, the others are the motives and the means. What looks
like disunity and an unsure, 'haphazard' way of'trying things out', is an
elemental restlessness, the one goal of which is to understand 'life' philosophically and to secure for this understanding a hermeneutical foundation in terms of 'life itself'. Everything centres in psychology, in which
'life' is to be understood in the historical context of its development and
its effects, and understood as the way in which man, as the possible abject
of the humane sciences, and especiaLly as the root of these sciences, is.
HeI'meneutics is the way this understanding enlightens itself; it is also the
methodology of historiology, though only in a derivative form.
In the contemporaneous discussions, Dilthey's own researches for laying
the basis for the humane sciences were forced one-sidedly into the field
of the theory of science; and it was of course with a regard for such discussions that his publications were often oriented in this direction. But the
'logic of the humane sciences' was by no means central for him-no more
than he was striving in his 'psychology' 'merely' to make improvements in
the positive science of the psychical.
Dilthey's friend, Count Yorck, gives unambiguous expression to Dilthey's ownmost philosophical tendency in the communications between
them, when he alludes to 'our common interest in understanding historicaLity'
(italicized by the author).xiU Dilthey's researches are only now becoming
accessible in their full scope; ifwe are to make them our own, we need the
steadiness and concreteness of coming to terms with them in principle.
This not the place [Ort] for discussing in detail the problems which moved
him, or how he was moved by them. xlv We shall, however, describe in a
provisional way sorne of Count Yorck's central ideas, by selecting characteristic passages from the letters.
In these communications, Yorck's own tendency is brought to life by

Il. 5
Being and Time
45 1
the labours of Dilthey and his ways offormulating questions, and it shows
itselfwhen Yorck takes his stand as to the tasks of the discipline which is
to lay the basis-analytical psychology. On Dilthey's Academy paper,
'Ideen über eine beschreibende und zergliedernde Psycholgie' (1894), he
writes: 'It gets firmly laid down that the consideration of the Self is the
primary means of knowing, and that the primary procedure of knowing
is analysis. From this standpoint principles get formulated which are
verified by th'eir own findings. No progress is made towards critically
breaking down constructive psychology and its assumptions, or towards explaining it and thus refuting it from within' (BriefwechseL, p. 177). '... your
disregard for breaking things down critically (that is, for demonstrating their provenience psychologically, and carrying this out trenchantly
in detail) is connected, in my opinion, with your conception of the theory
of knowledge and with the position which you assign [zuweisen] to it'
(p. 177). '. . . only a theory of knowledge gives the expLanation for this
inapplicability (the fact ofit has been laid down and made plain). It has
to render account for the adequacy ofscientific methods; it has to pravide
the grounds for a doctrine ofmethod, instead ofhaving its methods taken
-at a venture, 1 must say-from particular areas' (pp. 179 f.).
At bottom Yorck is demanding a logic that shall stride ahead of the
sciences and guide them, as did the logic of Plato and Aristotle; and this
demand includes the task of worl;:ing out, positively and radically, the
different categorial structures of those entities which are Nature and of
those which are history (Dasein). Yorck finds that Dilthey's investigations
'put tao LittLe stress on differentiation genericaLly between the ontical and the His·
torical' (p. 191, italicized by the author). 'In particular, the procedure of
comparison is claimed to be the method for the humane sciences. Here 1
disagree with you ... Comparison is always aesthetic, and always adheres
to the pattern of things. Windelband assigns [weist . . .. zu] patterns to
history. Your concept of the type is an entirely inward one. Here it is a
matter of characteristics, not of patterns. For Windelband, history is a
series of pictures, of individual patterns-an aesthetic demand. To the
natural scientist, there remains, beside his science, as a kind of human
tranquillizer, only aesthetic enjoyment. But your conception of history
is that of a nexus of forces, of unities of force, to which the category of
"pattern" is to be applicable only by a kind oftransference' (p. 193)'
ln terms of his sure instinct for 'differentiating between the ontical and
the Historical', Yorck knew how strongly traditional historical research
still maintains itself in 'purely ocular ways of ascertaining' (p. 192),
which are aimed at the corporeal and at that which has pattern.
'Ranke is a great ocularist, for whom things that have vanished can

400

45 2

401

Being and Time

II. 5

never become actualities . .• Ranke's whole tribc also provides the explanation for the way the material of history has been restricted to the political.
Only the politica1 is dramatic' (p. 60). 'The modifications which the
course of time has brought appear unessential to me, and 1 should like to
appraise this very differentl'j{. For instance, 1 regard the so-called Historical school as a mere sidestream within the same river-bed, and as representing only one branch of an old and thoroughgoing opposition. The
name is somewhat deceptive. Thal school was by no means a Hislorical one
(italicized by the author), but an antiquarian one, construing things
aesthetically, while the great dominating activity was one of mechanical
construction. Hence what it contributed methodologically-to the method
ofrationality-was only a general feeling' (pp. 68 f.).
'The genuine Philologus-he conceives of History as a cabinet of antiquities. 1 Where nothing is palpable-whither one has been guided only by
a living psychical transposition-these gentlemen never come. At heart
they are natural scientists, and they become sceptics all the more because
experimentation is lacking. We must keep wholly aloof from all such
rubbish, for instance, as how often Plato was in Magna Graecia or Syracuse. On this nothing vital depends. This superficial affectation which 1
have seen through critically, winds up at last with a big question-mark
and is put to shame by the great Realities of Homer, Plato, and the New
Testament. Everything that is actually Real becomes a mere phantom
when one considers it as a "Thing in itself"-when it does not get Experienced' (p. 61). 'These "scientists" stand over against the powers of the
times like the over-refined French society of the revolutionary period.
Here as there, formalism, the cult of the form; the defining of relationship
is the last word in wisdom. Naturally, thought which runs in this direction
has its own history, which, 1 suppose, is still unwritten. The groundlessness ofsuch thinking and ofany beliefin it (and such thinking, epistemo10gicaHy considered, is a metaphysical attitude) is a Historical product'
(p. 39). 'It seems to me that the ground-swells evoked by the principle of
eccentricity, Il which led to a new era more than four hundred years ago,
have become exceedingly broad and flat; that our knowledge has progressed to the point of cancelling itself out; that man has withdrawn so
far from himself that he no longer sees himself at aH. The' 'modern man"
-that is to say, the post-Renaissance man-is readyforburial' (p. 83)' On
the other hand, "AlI History that is truly alive and not just reflecting a
tinge oflife, is a critique' (p. Ig). 'But historical knowledge is, for the best
1 Yorck is here referring to Karl Friedrich Hermann, whose Geschichte und System der
platonischen Philosophie (Heidelberg, 1839) he has been reading.
2 Presumably the eccentricity of the planetary motions as described by Kepler, following on the work of Copernicus.

II. 5
Being and Time
453
part, knowledge of the bidden sources' (p. lOg). 'With history, what makes
a spectacle and catches the eye is not the main thing. The nerves are
invisible, just as the essentials in general are invisible. While it is said that
"if you were quiet, you would be strong", the variant is also true that
"if you are quiet, you will perceive-that is, understand" , (p. 26). 'And
then 1 enjoy the quietude of soliloquizing and communing with the spirit
of bistory. This spirit is one who did not appear ta Faust in bis study, or
to Master Goethe either. But they would have felt no alarm in making
way for bim, however grave and compelling such an apparition might be.
For he is brotherly, akin to us in another and deeper sense than are the
denizens of bush and field. These exertions are like Jacob's wrestlinga sure gain for the wrestler himself. Indeed this is what matters fust of aIl'
(p. 133)·
Yorck gained his cIear insight into the basic character of history as
'virtuality' from his knowledge of the character of the Being which human
Dasein itself possesses, not from the abjects of historical study, as a
theory of science would demand. 'The entire psycho-physical datum is
not one that is (Here "Being" equals the Being-present-at-hand of Nature.
-Author's remark) but one that lives; this is the germinal point of historicality.l And if the consideration of the Self is directed not at an
abstract "1" but at the fulness of my Self, it will find me HistoricaIly
determined, just as physics knows me as cosmicaIly determined. Just as 1
am Nature, so 1 am history .. .' (p. 71). And Yorck, who saw through aIl
bogus 'defining of relationships' and 'groundless' relativisms, did not
hesitate to draw the final conclusion from his insight into the historicality
of Dasein. 'But, on the other hand, in view of the inward historicality of
self-consciousness, a systematic that is divorced from History is methodo10gicaIly inadequate. Just as physiology cannot be studied in abstraction
from physics, neither can philosophy from historicality-especiaIly if it is
a critical philosophy. Behaviour and historicality are like breathing and
atmospheric pressure; and-this may sound rather paradoxical-it seems
to me methodologicaIly like a residue from metaphysics not to historicize
one's philosophizing' (p. 6g). 'Because to philosophize is to live, there is,
in my opinion (do not be alarmed!), a philosophy of history-but who
would be able to write it? Certainly it is not the sort ofthing it has hitherto been taken to be, or the sort that has so far been attempted; you have
declared yourself incontrovertibly against aIl that. Up till now, the question has been formulated in a way which is false, even impossible; but
this is not the only way of formulating it. Thus there is no longer any
. 1 Yorck's text reads as fol1ows: 'Das die gesammte psychophysische Gegebenheit nicht
!st sondern lebt, ist der Keimpunkt der Geschichtlichkeit'. Heidegger plausibly changes
'Das' to '... dass' in the earlier editions, to 'Dass' in the later ones.

402

454
Being and Time
11·5
actual philosophizing which would not be Historical. The separation
between systematic philosophy and Historical presentation is essentially
incorrect' (p. 251). 'That a science can become practical is now, of course,
the real basis for its justification. But the mathematical praxis is not the
only one. The practical aim of our standpoint is one that is pedagogical
in the broadest and deepest sense of the word. Such an aim is the soul
of aIl true philosophy, and the truth of Plato and Aristotle' (pp. 42 f.).
'Vou know my views on the possibility of ethics as a science. In spite of
that, this can always be done a little better. For whom are such books
really written? Registries about registries! The only thing worthy of notice
is what drives them to come from physics to ethics' (p. 73). 'Ifphilosophy
is conceived as a manifestation of life, and not as the coughing up of a
baseless kind of thinking (and such thinking appears baseless because
one's glance gets turned away from the basis of consciousness), then one's
task is as meagre in its results as it is complicated and arduous in the
obtaining of them. Freedom from prejudice is what it presupposes, and
such freedom is hard to gain' (p. 250).
It is plain from Yorck's allusion to the kind of difficulty met with in
such investigations, that he. himself was already on the way to bringing
within our grasp categorially the Historical as opposed to the ontical
(ocular), and to raising up 'life' into the kind of scientific understanding
that is appropriate to it. The aesthetico-mechanistic way of thinking l
'finds verbal expression more easily than does an analysis that goes behind
intuition, and this can be explained by the wide extent to which words
have their provenience in the ocular ... On the other hand, that which
penetratcs into the basis ofvitality eludes an exoteric presentation; hence
ail its terminology is symbolic and ineluctable, not intelligible to aIl.
Because philosophical thinking is of a special kind, its linguistic expression
has a special character' (pp. 70 f.). 'But you are acquainted with my
liking for paradox, which 1 justify by saying that paradoxicality is a mark
of truth, and that the communis opinio is nowhere in the truth, but is like
an elemental prccipitate ofa halfway understandingwhichmakes generalizations; in its relationship to truth it is like the sulphurous fumes which
the lightning leaves behind. Truth is never an element. To dissolve
elemental public opinion, and, as far as possible, to make possible the
moulding of individuality in seeing and looking, would be a pedagogical
1 Yorck is here discussing Lotze and Fechner, and suggestiong that their 'rare talent for
expression' was abetted by their 'aesthetico-mechanistic way of thinking', as Heidegger
caUs it. The reader who is puzzled by the way Yorck lumps together the 'aesthet~c', the
'mechanistic' and the 'intuitive', should bear in mind that here the words 'aesthetlc' and
'intuition' ar~ used in the familiar Kantian sense of immediate sensory experience, and
that Yorck thinks of 'mechanism' as falling entirely within the 'horizon' of such experience without penetrating beyond it.

11·5
Being and Time
455
task for the state. Then, instead of a so-called public conscience-instead
of this radical externalization-individual consciences-that is to say,
consciences-would again become powerful' (pp. 249 f.).
If one has an interest in understanding historicality, one is brought to
the task of working out a 'generic differentiation between the ontical and
the Historical'. Thefundamental aim of the 'philosophy of life'l is tied up with
this. Nevertheless, the formulation of the question needs to be radicalized
in principle. How are we to get historicality into our grasp phiiosophically
as distinguished from the ontical, and conceive it 'categoriaIly', except by
bringing both the 'ontical' and the 'Historical' into a more primordial uniry,
so that they can be compared and distinguished ? But that is possible only if
we attain the following insights: (1) that the question of historicality is an
ontological question about the state of Being ofhistorical entities; (2) that
the question of the ontical is the ontological question of the state of Being
of entities other than Dasein- of what is present-at-hand in the widest
sense; (3) that the ontical is only one domain of entities. The idea of Being
embraces both the 'ontical' and the 'Historical'. It is this idea which must
let itselfbe 'generically differentiated'.
It is not by chance that Yorck calls those entities which are not historical, simply the "ontical". This just reftects the unbroken dominion of
the traditional ontology, which, as derived from the ancient way of formulating the question ofBeing, narrows down the ontological problematic
in principle and holds it facto The problem of differentiating bctween the
ontical and the Historical cannot be worked out as a problem for research
unless we have made sure in advance what is the clue to it, by c1arifying, through
fundamental ontology, the question of the meaning of Being in general.xv
Thus it becomes plain in what sense the preparatory existential-temporal
analytic of Dasein is resolved to foster the spirit of Count Yorck in the
service of Dilthey's work.
l ' "Lebensphilosophie" '. The word is italicized only in the later editions.

II. 6

VI
TEMPORALITY AND WITHIN-TIME-NESS AS THE
SOURCE OF THE ORDINARY CONCEPTION OF TIME

1f 78. The Incompleteness of the Foregoing Temporal Ana{Ysis of Dasein
To demonstrate that temporality is constitutive for Dasein's Being and
how it is thus constitutive, we have shown that historicality, as a state-ofBeing which belongs to existence, is 'at bottom' temporality. We have
carried through our Interpretation of the temporal character of history
without regard for the 'fact' that all historizing runs its course 'in time'.
Factically, in the everyday understanding of Dasein, all history is known
merely as that which happens 'within-time'; but throughout the course of
our existential-temporal analysis of historicality, this understanding has
been ruled out of order. If the existential analytic is to make Dasein
ontologically transparent in its very facticity, then the factical 'onticotemporal' interpretation ofhistory must also be explicit{y given its due. It
is all the more necessary that the time 'in which' entities are encountered
should be analysed in principle, since not only history but natural processes
too are determined 'by time'. But still more elemental than the circumstance that the 'time factor' is one that occurs in the sciences ofhistory and
Nature, is the Fact that before, Dasein does any thematical research, it
'reckons with time' and regulates itself according ta it. And here again what
remains decisive is Dasein's way of 'reckoning with its time'-a way of
reckoning which precedes any use of measuring equipment by which
time can be determined. The reckoning is prior to such equipment, and is
what makes anything like the use of c10cks possible at all.
In its factical existence, any particularDasein either 'has the time' or 'does
not have it'. It either 'takes time' for something or 'cannot allow any time
for it'. Why does Dasein 'take time', and why can it 'lose' it? Where does
it take time from? How is this time related to Dasein's temporality?
Factical Dasein takes time inta its reckoning, without any existential
understanding of temporality. Reckoning with time is an elemental kind
of behaviour which must be c1arified before we turn to the question of
what it means to say that entities are 'in time'. AlI Dasein's behaviour is

Being and Time
457
to be Interpreted in terms of its Being-that is, in terms of temporality.
We must show how Dasein as temporality temporalizes a kind ofbehaviour
which relates itself to time by taking it into its reckoning. Thus our
previous characterization of temporality is not only quite incomplete in
that we have not paid attention to aH the dimensions ofthis phenomenon;
it also is defective in principle because something like world-time, in the
rigorous sense of the existential-temporal conception of the world, belongs
to temporality itself. We must come to understand how this is possible and
why it is necessary. Thus the 'time' which is familiar to us in the ordinary
way-the time 'in which' entities occur-will be illuminated, and so will
the within-time-ness of these entities.
Everyday Dasein, the Dasein which takes time, cornes across time
proximally in what it encounters within-the-world as ready-to-hand and
present-at-hand. The time which it has thus 'experienced' is understood
within the horizon of that way ofunderstanding Being which is the c10sest
for Dasein; that is, it is understood as something which is itself somehow
present-at-hand. How and why Dasein cornes to develop the ordinary
conception of time, must be c1arified in terms of its state-of-Being as
concerning itself with time--a state-of-Being with a temporal foundation.
The ordinary conception of time owes its origin to a way in which
primordial time has been levelled off. By demonstrating that this is the
source of the ordinaryconception, we shalljustify our earlier Interpretation
of temporality as primordial time.
In the development of this ordinary conception, there is a remarkable
vacillation as to whether the character to be attributed to time is 'subjective' or 'Objective'. Where time is taken as being in itself, it gets
allotted pre-eminently to the 'soul' notwithstanding. And where it has the
kind of character which belongs to 'consciousness', it still functions
·Objectively'. In Hegel's Interpretation of time both possibilities are
brought to the point where, in a certain manner, they cancel each other
out. Hegel tries to define the connection between 'time' and 'spirit' in
such a manner as to make intelligible why the spirit, as history, 'falls into
time'. We seem to be in accord with Hegel in the results of the Interpretation we have given for Dasein's temporality and for the way world-time
belongs to it. But because our analysis differs in principle from his in its
approach, and because its orientation is precisely the opposite of his in
that it aims at fundamental ontology, a short presentation of Hegel's way
of taking the relationship between time and spirit may serve to make
plain our existential-ontological Interpretation of Dasein's temporality,
of world-time. and of the source of the ordinary conception of time, and
may settle this in a provisional manner.

405

406

45 8
Being and Time
II.6
The question ofwhether and how time has any 'Being', and ofwhy and
in what sense we designate it as 'being', cannot be answered until we have
shown to what extent temporality itself, in the totality ofits temporalizing'
makes it possible for us somehow to have an understanding of Being and
address ouselves to entities. Our chapter will be divided as follows:
Dasein's temporality, and our concern with time (Section 79); the time
with which we concern ourselves, and within-time-ness (Section 80);
within-time-ness and the genesis of the ordinary conception of time
(Section 81); a comparison of the existential-ontological connection of
temporality, Dasein, and world-time, with Hegel's way of taking the
relation between time and spirit (Section 82); the existential-temporal
analytic of Dasein and the question of fundamental ontology as to the
meaning of Being in general (Section 83).
~ 79. Dasein's Temporality, and our Concern with Time

Dasein exists as an entity for which, in its Being, that Being is itself
an issue. Essentially ahead of itself, it has projected itself upon its
potentiality-for-Being before going on to any mere consideration of
itself. In its projection it reveals itself as something which has been
thrown. It has been thrownly abandoned to the 'world', and falls into
it concernfully.1 As care-that is, as existing in the unity of the projection which has been fallingly thrown-this entity has been disclosed
as a "there". As being with Others, it maintains itselfin an average way
of interpreting-a way which has been Articulated in discourse and
expressed in language. Being-in-the-world has always expressed itself, and
as Being alongside entities encountered within-the-world, it constantly
expresses itself in addressing itself to the very object of its concem and
discussing it. The concem of circumspective common sense is grounded
in temporality-indeed in the mode of a making-present which retains
and awaits. Such concem, as concernfully reckoning up, planning,
preventing, or taking precautions, always says (whether audibly or not)
that something is to happen 'then', that something else is to be attended to
'beforehand', that what has failed or eluded us 'on that former occasion' is
something that we must 'now' make up for. 1l
In the 'then', concern expresses itselfas awaiting; in the 'on that former
occasion', as retaining; in the 'now', as making present. In the 'then'but mostly unexpressed-lies the 'now-not-yet'; that is to say, this is
l 'Geworfen der "Welt" überlassen, verflillt es besorgend an sie.'
2 ' •.•• "dann"--soll das geschehen, "zuvor"-jenes seine Erledigung finden,

"jezt"-

das nachgeholt werden, was "damaIs" misslang und entging.' Notice that the German
'dann', unIike its English cognate 'then', is here thought of as having primarily a future
reference.

Il.6
Being and Time
459
spoken in a making-present which is either awaitingly retentive or
awaitingly forgetful. In the 'on that former occasion' lurks the 'now-nolonger'. With this, retaining expresses itself as a making-present which
awaits. The 'then' and the 'on that former occasion' are understood with
regard to a 'now' ; that is to say, making present has a peculiar importance. 407
Ofcourse it always temporalizes itselfin a unity with awaiting and retaining, even if these may take the modified form of a forgetting which does
not await anything; in the mode of such forgetting, temporality ensnares
itself in the Present, which, in making present, says pre-eminently 'Now!
Now!' That which concem awaits as what is closest to it, gets addressed
in the 'forthwith' [im "sogleich"]; what has been made proximally
available or has been lost is addressed in the 'just-now' [im "soeben"].
The horizon for the retaining which expresses itself in the 'on that former
occasion' is the 'earlier'; the horizon for the 'then' is the 'later on' ('that
which is to come'); the horizon for the 'now' is the 'today'.
Every 'then', however, is, as such, a 'then, when .. .'; every 'on that
former occasion' is an 'on that former occasion, when .. .'; every 'now' is
a 'now that .. .'.1 The 'now', the 'then', and the 'on that former occasion'
thus have a seeIningly obvious relational structure which we calI "datability" [Datierbarkeit]. Whether this dating is factically done with respect to
a 'date' on the calendar, must still becompletelydisregarded. Even without
'dates' of this sort, the 'now', the 'then', and the 'on that former occasion'
have been dated more or less definitely. And even if the dating is not made
more definite, this does not mean that the structure of datability is missing
or that it is just a matter of chance.
Wherein is such datability grounded, and to what does it essentially belong?
Can any more superfluous question indeed be raised? It is 'weIl known'
that what we have in Inind with the 'now that .. .' is a 'point of time'.
The 'now' is time. Incontestably, the 'now that .. .', the 'then, when .. .',
and the 'on that former occasion' are things that we understand. And we
also understand in a certain way that these are aIl connected with 'time'.
But that with this sort of thing one has 'time' itself in mind, and how this
is possible, and what 'time' signifies-these are matters of which we have
no conception in our 'natural' understanding of the 'now' and so forth.
Is it indeed obvious, then, that something like the 'then', the 'now', and
the 'on that former occa~ion', is something we 'understand without further
ado', and 'quite naturaIly' bring to expression? Where do we get this 'now
that .. .'? Have we found this sort of thing among entities within-theworld-among those that are present-at-hand? Manifestly not. Then
l 'Jedes "dann" aber ist aIs salelles ein "dann, wann •• .", jedes "damais" ein "damais.
ais .. .", jedes "jetzt" ein "jetzt, da •••".'

Being and Time
II.6
have we found it at aIl? Have we ever set ourselves to search for this and
establish its character? We avail ourselves of it 'at any time' without
having taken it over explicitly, and we constantly make use of it even
though we do not always make utterances about it. Even in the most
trivial, offhand kind of everyday talk ('It's cold', for instance) we also
have in mind a 'now that .. .'. Why is it that when Dasein addresses
itself to the objects of its concern, it also expresses a 'now that .. .', a
'then, when ••.', or an 'on that former occasion, when ...', even though
it does so mostly without uttering it? First, because in addressing itself to
something interpretatively, it expresses itseiftoo; that is to say, it expresses
408 its Being alongside the ready-to-hand-a Being which understands circumspectively and which uncovers the ready-to-hand and lets it be encountered. And secondly, because this very addressing and discussingwhich interprets itseif also-is based upon a making-present and is possible
only as such. t
The making-present which awaits and retains, interprets itself. And this
in turn is possible only because, as something which in itself is ecstatically
open, it has in each case been disclosed to itself already and can be
Articulated in the kind of interpretation which is accompanied by understanding and discourse. Because temporality is ecstatico-horizonally constitutive
for the clearedness of the "there", temporality is always primordially interpretable
in the "there" and is accordingly Jamiliar to us. The making-present which
interprets itself-in other words, that which has been interpreted and is
addressed in the 'now'-is what we call 'time'. This simply makes known
to us that temporality-which, as ecstatically open, is recognizable-is
familiar, proximally and for the most part, only as interpreted in this
concernful manner. 1 But while time is 'immediately' intelligible and
recognizable, this does not preclude the possibility that primordial
temporality as such may remain unknown and unconceived, and that this
is also the case with the source of the time which has been expressed-a
source which temporalizes itself in that temporality.
The fact that the structure of datability belongs essentially to what has
been interpreted with the 'now', the 'then', and the 'on that former
occasion', becomes the most elemental proof that what has thus been
interpreted has originated in the temporality which interprets itself.
When we say 'now', we always understand a 'now that so and
460

l 'Das sich auslegende Gegenwiirtigen, das heisst das im "jetzt" angesprochene Ausgelegte nennen wir "Zeit". Darin bekundet sich lediglich, dass die Zeitlichkeit aIs
ekstatisch offene kenntlich, zunachst und zumeist nur in dieser besorgenden Ausgelegtheit
bekannt ist.' The older editions have 'ausgesprochenc' ('expressed') rather than 'angesprochene' ('addressed'); the comma after 'Zeitlichkeit' is missing, and the particle 'ja'
appears just before 'zunachst'.

II. 6

Being and Time
461
so ....'1 though we d~ ?ot say aIl this. Why? Because the "now" interprets a
makzng-present of entltles. In the 'now that ...' lies the ecstatical character
of the Present. The datability of the 'now', the 'then', and the 'on that
former occasion', rej/ects the ecstatical constitution of temporality, and is
therefore essential for the time itself that has been expressed. The structure
of the datability of the 'now', the 'then', and the 'on that former occasion'
is evidence that these, stemming Jrom temporality, are themselves time. Th;
interpretative expressing of the 'now', the 'then', and the 'on that former
occasion', is the most primordial way of assigning a time. 2 In the ecstatical
unity of temporality-which gets understood along with datability, but
unthematically and without being recognizable as such-Dasein has
already been disclosed to itself as Being-in-the-world, and entities withinthe-world have been discovered along with it; because of this, interpreted
time has already been given a dating in terms of those entities which are
encountered in the disclosedness of the "there": "now that-the door
slams"; "now that-my book is missing", and so forth. 3
The horizons whieh belong to the 'now', the 'then', and the 'on that
former occasion', aIl have their source of ecstatical temporality; by reason
of this, these horizons too have the character of datability as 'today,
when .. .', 'later on, when .. .', and 'earlier, when .. ."
If awaiting understands itself in the 'then' and interprets itself, and
thereby, as making present, understands that which it awaits, and understands this in terms of its 'now', then the 'and-now-not-yet' is already
implied when we 'assign' a 'then'. The awaiting which makes present
understands the 'until-then'. This 'until-then' is Articulated by interpretation: it 'has its time' as the "in-between", which likewise has a relationship of datability. This relationship gets expressed in the 'during-this' or
'meanwhile' ["wiihrend dessen .. ."]. The 'during' can itselfbe Articulated
awaitingly by concern, by assigning some more 'thens'. The 'untilthen' gets divided up by a number of 'from-then-till-thens', which, however, have been 'embraced' beforehand in awaitingly projecting the
primary 'then'. 'Enduring' gets Articulated in the understanding one has
l ' ''Jetzt''-sagend verstehen wir immer auch schon, ohne es mitzusagen ein "-da
das und das .. .'
'
2 ' ••• dass diese vom StamTTl8 der Zeitlichlceit, selbst Zeit sind. Das auslegende Aussprechen
der "j,e~r, "dann" ,u~d ':dama~" ist die ursprünglichs!e Zeitangabe,' The earlier editions
have sIe mstead of dlese . (Whlle we have generally tned ta reserve the verb 'assign' for
verbs such as 'verweisen' and 'zuweisen', it is convenient to use it in this chapter to
translate such expressions as 'angeben', 'Angabe', and 'Zeitangabe'.)
8 ' ••• jetzt, da-die Tür schlagt; jetzt, da-mir das Buch fehh, und dergleichen,' While
~e phrase 'jetzt' da . . " ordinarily means 'now that .. ,', Heidegger here seems to be
mterpreting it with an illusion to the 'da' which we have usually translated as 'there'the 'da' of 'Dasein'.
4. , "Heute, wo .. ,", "Spaterhin, wann .. ," und "Früher, da .. ,",'

410

462
Being and Time
II.6
of the 'during' when one awaits and makes present. l This lasting[Dauern],
in turn, is the time which is manifest in temporality's interpretation of
itselfj in our concern this time thus gets currently, but unthematicaIly,
understood as a 'span' ["Spanne"]. The making-present which awaits
and retains, lays 'out' a 'during' with a span, only because it has thereby
disclosed itself as the way in which its historical temporaIity has been
ecstaticaIly stretched along, even though it does not know itself as this. 2 But
here a further peculiarity of the time which has been 'assigned' shows
itself. Not only does the 'during' have a spanj but every 'now', 'then', and
'on that former occasion' has, with its datability-structure, its own
spanned character, with the width of the span varying: 'now'-in the
intermission, while one is eating, in the evening, in summerj 'then'-at
breakfast, when one is taking a climb, and so forth.
The concern which awaits, retains, and makes present, is one which
'aIlows itself' so much time; and it assigns itselfthis time concernfuIly, even
without determining the time by any specific reckoning, and before any
such reckoning bas been done. Here time dates itselfin one's current mode
ofaIlowing oneselftime concernfuIly; and it does so in terms ofthose very
matters with which one concerns oneselfenvironmentaIly, and which have
been disclosed in the understanding with its accompanying state-of-mind
-in terms ofwhat one does 'aIl day long'. The more Dasein is awaitingly
absorbed in the object of its concern and forgets itself in not awaiting
itself, the more does even the time which it 'aIlows' itself remain covered up
by this way of 'aIlowing'. When Dasein is 'living along' in an everyday
concernful manner, it just never understands itself as running along in a
Continuously enduring sequence of pure 'nows'. By reason of this covering
up, the time which Dasein aIlows itself has gaps in it, as it were. Often
we do not bring a 'day' together again when we come back to the time
which we have 'used'. But the time which has gaps in it does not go to
pieces in this lack-of-togetherness, which is rather a mode of that
temporality which has already been disclosed and stretched along ecstaticaIly.
The manner in which the time we have 'aIlowed' 'runs its course', and the
way in which concern more or less explicitly assigns itself that time, can
be properly explained as phenomena only if, on the one band, we avoid
l'Mit dem gewiirtigend-gegenwiirtigenden Verstehen des "wiihrend" wird das
"Wiihren" artikuliert.' 'Wiihren' of course means 'enduring' in the sense of lasting or
continuing, not in that of 'suffering' or 'tolerating'.
2 'Das gewiirtigend-behaltende Gegenwiirtigen legt nur deshalb ein gespanntes
"wiihrend" "aus", weil es dabei sich ais die ekstatische Erstrecktheit der geschichtlichen
Zeitlichkeit, wenngleich ais solche unerkannt, erschlossen ist.' Our translation of 'gespanntes' as 'with a span' preserves the connection with 'Spanne' but misses the connotation
of'tenseness', which Heidegger clearly has in mind elsewhere (eogo H. 261 fo, 374) and is
surely suggesting here. The pun on 'auslegen' ('interpret') and 'legt ... "aus" , ('lays
"out" ') also disappears in translation.

II. 6

Being and Time
463
the theoretical 'representation' of a Continuous stream of "nows", and if,
on the other hand, the possible ways in which Dasein assigns itself time
and aIlows itself time are to be conceived of as determined primarily in
terms of how Dasein, in a manner corresponding to its current existence, 'kas' its time.
In an earlier passage authentic and inauthentic existing have been
characterized with regard to those modes of the temporalizing of temporality upon which such existing is founded. According to tbat characterization, the irresoluteness of inauthentic existence temporalizes itself in the
mode of a making-present which does not await but forgets. He who is
irresolute understands himself in terms of those very closest events and
be-fallings which he encounters in such a making-present and which
thrust themselves upon him in varying ways. Busily losing himself in the
object ofhis concern, he loses his time in it too. Hence his characteristic way
of talking-'I have no time'. But just as he who exists inauthenticaIly is
constantly losing time and never 'has' any, the temporality of authentic
existence remains distinctive in that such existence, in its resoluteness,
never loses time and 'always has time'. For the temporality of resoluteness
has, with relation to its Present, the character of a moment of vision. When
such a moment makes the Situation authenticaIly present, this makingpresent does not itself take the lead, but is held in that future which is in
the process of having-been. One's existence in the moment of vision temporalizes itself as something that has been stretched along in a way which
is fatefuIlywhole in the sense of the authentic historical constancyofthe Self.
This kind oftemporal existence bas its timefor Wbat the Situation demands
of it, and it has it 'constantly'. But resoluteness discloses the "there" in
this way only as a Situation. So if he who is resolute encounters anything
that has been disclosed, he can never do so in such a way as to lose his
time on it irresolutely.
The "there" is disclosed in a way which is grounded in Dasein's own temporality
as ecstatically stretched along, and with this disclosure a 'time' is allotted to Dasein;
only because of this can Dasein, asfactically thrown, 'take' its time and lose it.
As something disclosed, Dasein exists facticaIly in the way of Being with
Others. It maintains itselfin an intelligibility which is public and average.
When the 'now that .. .' and the 'then when .. .' have been interpreted
and expressed in our everyday Being with one another, they will be understood in principle, even though their dating is unequivocal only within
certain limits. In the 'most intimate' Being-with-one-another of several
people, they can say 'now' and say it 'together', though each of them gives
a different date to the 'now' which he is saying: "now that this or that
bas come to pass •. ." The 'now' which anyone expresses is always said
in the publicness of Being-in-the-world with one another. Thus the time

411

464
Being and Time
II.6
which any Dasein has currently interpreted and expressed has as such
already been given a public character on the basis of that Dasein's ecstatical
Being-in-the-world. In so far, then, as everyday concern understands
itselfin terms of the 'world' ofits concem and takes its 'time', it does not
know this 'time' as ils own, but concernfully utilizes the time which 'there
is' ["es gibt"]-the time with which "they" reckon. Indeed the publicness
of 'time' is aIl the more compelling, the more explicitly factical Dasein
concerns itselfwith time in specifically taking it into its reckoning.

So far we have only had to understand provisionally how Dasein, as
grounded in temporality, is, in its very existing, concemed with times
and how, in such interpretative concem, time makes itself public for
Being-in-the-world. But the sense in which time 'is' if it is of the kind
which is public and has been expressed, remains completely undefined,
if indeed such time can be considered as being at aIl. Before we can make
any decision as to whether public time is 'merely subjective' or 'Objectively actual', or neither of these, its phenomenal character must first
be determined more precisely.
When time is made public, this does not happen just occasionally and
subsequently. On the contrary, because Dasein, as something ecstaticotemporal, is already disclosed, and because understanding and interpretation both belong to existence, time has already made itself public in
concem. One directs oneself according to it, so that it must somehow be the
sort of thing which Everyman can come across.
Although one can concem oneself with time in the manner which we
have characterized-namely, by dating in terms of environmental events
-this always happens basically within the horizon of that kind of concem
with time which we knOW as astronomical and calendrical time-reckoning.
Such reckoning does not occur by accident, but has its existential-ontological necessity in the basic state of Dasein as care. Because it is essential
to Dasein that it exists fallingly as something thrown, it interprets its
time concernfully by way of time-reckoning. In this, the 'real' makingpublic oftime gets temporalized, so that we must say that Dasein's thrownness
is the reason why 'there is' time publicly.l Ifwe are to demonstrate that public
time has its source in factical temporality, and ifwe are to assure ourselves
that this demonstration is as intelligible as possible, the time which has
been interpreted in the temporality of concem must fi.rst be characterized,

to be seen in the quantification of time but must be conceived more primordially in terms of the temporality of the Dasein which reckonswith time.
'Public time' turns out to be the kind of time 'in which' the ready-tohand and the present-at-hand within-the-world are encountered. This
requires that these entities which are not of the character of Dasein, shall
be called entities "within-time". The Interpretation of within-time-ness
gives us a more primordial insight into the essence of 'public time' and
likewise makes it possible to define its 'Being'.
The Being of Dasein is care. This entity exists fallingly as something
that has been thrown. Abandoned to the 'world' which is discovered with
its factical "there", and concernfully submitted to it, Dasein awaits its
potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world; it awaits it in such a manner that
it 'reckons' on and 'reckons' with whatever has an involvement for the sake
of this potentiality-for-Being-an involvement which, in the end, is a
distinctive one. l Everyday circumspective Being-in-the-world needs the
possibility of sight (and this means that it needs brightness) if it is to deal
concernfully with what is ready-to-hand within the present-at-hand. With
the factical disclosedness of Dasein's world, Nature has been uncovered
for Dasein. In its thrownness Dasein has been surrendered to the changes
of day and night. Day with its brightness gives it the possibility of sight;
night takes this away.
Dasein awaits with circumspective concem the possibility of sight, and
it understands itselfin terms ofits daily work; in thus awaiting and understanding, it gives its time with the 'then, when it dawns .. .'2 The 'then'
with which Dasein concems itself gets dated in terms of something which
is connected with getting bright, and which is connected with it in the
closest kind of environmental involvement-namely, the rising of the sun.
"Then, when the sun rises, it is time for so and so." Thus Dasein dates
the time which it must take, and dates it in terms ofsomething it encounters
within the world and within the horizon of its abandonment to the world
-in terms of something encountered as having a distinctive involvement for its circumspective potentiality-for-Being-in-the-world. Concern
makes use of the 'Being-ready-to-hand' of the sun, which sheds forth light
and warmth. The sun dates the time which is interpreted in concem. 413
In terms of this dating arises the 'most naural' measure of time-the day.

l'In ihr zeitigt sich die "eigentliche" Veroffentlichung der Zeit, sodass gesagt werden
muss: die Geworfenheit des Daseins ist der Grund dafür, dass es Offentlich Zeit "gibt".' Heidegger's
quotation marks around 'gibt' suggest an intentional pun which would permit the alternative translation: '... the reason why Dasein "gives" time publicly.'

l ' . . . dass es mit dem und alif das "rechnet", womit es umwillen dieses Seinkônnens
eine am Ende ausgezeichnete Bewandtnis hat.'
l1 ' ••• mit dem "dann, wann es tagt" .• .'

~ 80. The Time with which we Concern Ourselves, and Within-time-ness

412

II.6
Being and Time
465
if only in order to make clear that the essence of concem with time does
not lie in the application of numerical procedures in dating. Thus in timereckoning, what is decisive from an existential-ontological standpoint is not

466
Being and Time
Il.6
And because the temporality of that Dasein which must take its time is
finite, its days are already numbered. Concernful awaiting takes pr?caution to define the 'thens' with which it is to concern itself-that IS, to
divide up the day. And the 'during-the-daytime' makes this possible.
This dividing-up, in turn, is done with regard to that by which time is
dated-the journeying sun. Sunset and midday, like the sunrise itself,
are distinctive 'places' which this heavenly body occupies. !ts regularly
recurring passage is something which Dasein, as thrown into the world
and giving itself time temporalizingly, takes into its reckoning. Dasein
historizesfrom aay to aay by reason ofits way ofinterpreting time by dating
Ït-a way which is adumbrated in its thrownness into the "there".
This dating of things in terms of the heavenly body which sheds forth
light and warmth, and in terms of its distinctive 'places' in the sky, is a
way of assigning time which can be done in our Being with one another
'under the same sky', and which can be done for 'Everyman' at any time
in the same way, so that within certain limits everyone is proximallyagreed
upon it. That by which things are thus dated is available environmentally
and yet not restricted to the world of equipment with which one currently
concerns oneself. It is rather the case that in the world the environing
·
d
lWlt
' h'It. 11
Nature and the public environment are always d Iscovere
a ong
This public dating, in which everyone assigns himselfhis time, is one which
everyone can 'reckon' on simultaneously; it uses a publidy available
measure. This dating reckons with time in the sense of a measuring of time;
and such measuring requires something by which time is to be measured
-namely, a dock. This implies that along with the temporality of Dasein as
thrown, abandoned to the 'world', and giving itself time, something like a 'clock'
is also discovered-that is, something ready-to-hand which in its regular recurrence
has become accessible in one's making present awaitingry. The Being which has
been thrown and is alongside the ready-to-hand is grounded in temporality.
Temporality is the reason for the dock. As the condition for the possibility that a dock is factically necessary, temporality is likewise the
condition for its discoverability. For while the course of the sun is encountered along with the discoveredness of entities within-the-world, it is only
by making it present in awaitingly retaining, and by doing so in a way
which interprets itself, that dating in terms of what is ready-to-hand
environmentally in a public way is made possible and is also required.
Dasein has its basis in tcmporality, and the 'natural' dock which has
already been discovered along with Dasein's factical thrownness furnishes
the first motivation for the production and use of docks which will be
somewhat more handy; it also makes this possible. Indeed it does this in
such a manner that these 'artificial' docks must be 'adjusted' to that

Il. 6

Being ana Time
467
'natura!' one if the time which is primarily discoverable in the natural
dock is to be made accessible in its turn.
Before describing the chief features in the development of time-reckoning and the use of docks in their existential-ontological meaning, we must
first characterize more completely the time with which we are concerned
when we measure it. If the time with which we concern ourselves is 'really'
made public only when it gets measured, then if public time is to be accessible in a way which has been phenomenally unveiled, we must have access
to it by following up the way in which that which has been dated shows
itselfwhen dated in this 'reckoning' manner.
.whe~ th~ 'then' which interprets itselfin concernful awaiting gets dated,
thlS datmg mdudes sorne such statement as "then-when it dawns-it is
lime for one's daily work". The time which is interpreted in conccrn is
already understood as a time for something. The current 'now that so
and so .. .' is as such either appropriate or inappropriate. Not only is the 'now'
(and so too any mode of interpreted time) a 'now that .. .' which is
essentially datable; but as such it has essentially, at the same time, the
structure of appropriateness or inappropriateness. Time which has been
interpreted has by its very nature the character of 'the time for something'
or 'the wrong time for something'.1 When concern makes present by
awaiting and retaining, time is understood in relation to a "for-which"·2
,
and this in turn is ultimately tied up with a "for-the-sake-of-which" of
Dasein's potentiality-for-Being. With this "in-order-to" relation, the time
which has been made public makes manifest that structure with which
we have earlier11l become acquainted as signijicance, and which constitutes
the worldhood ofthe world. As 'the time for something', the time which has
been made public has essentially a world-character. Hencc the time which
makes itself public in the temporalizing of temporality is what wc designate as "world-time". And we designate it thus not because it is presentat-hand as an entity within-the-world (which it can never be), but because it
belongs to the world [zur Welt] in the sense which we have Interpreted
existential-ontologically. In the following pages we must show how the
essential relations of the world-structure (the 'in-order-to', for example) 'are
connected with public time (the 'then, when .. .', for example) by reason
of the ecstatico-horizonal constitution of temporality. Only now, in any
case, can the time with which we concern ourselves be completely characterized as to its structure: it is datable, spanned, and public; and as
having this structure, it belongs to the world itself. Every 'now', for
l '• . . den Charakter der "Zeit zu ..." bzw. der "Unzeit für .. .'
Il ' ••• ein Wozu .. .' Here English idiom caUs for the expression 'for-which' rather than

'towards-which', though the latter expression has served us fairly weU in similar context)
such as those cited in Heidegger's note iii below. (See also our note 1, p. lOg, H. 78 above.)

415

468
Being and Time
II.6
instance, which is expressed in a natural everyday manner, has this kind
of structure, and is understood as such, though pre-conceptually and
unthematically, when Dasein concernfully allows itself time.
The disclosedness of the natural clock belongs to the Dasein which
exi:;ts as thrown and falling; and in this disclosedness factical Dasein has
at the same time' already given a distinctive public character to the time
with which it concerns itself. As time-reckoning is perfected and the use
of docks becomes more refined, this making-public gets enhanced and
strengthened. We shall not give here a historiological presentation of the
historical evolution of time-reckoning and the use of clocks, with aIl its
possible variations. We must rather ask in an existential-ontological way
what mode of the temporalizing of Dasein's temporality becomes manifest
in the direction which the development of time-reckoning and clock-using
has taken. When this question is answered, there must arise a more primordial understanding of the fact that the measurement of time-and this
means also the explicit making-public of time as an object of concern-is
grounded in the temporality of Dasein, and indeed in a quite definite temporalizing of that temporality.
Comparison shows that for the 'advanced' Dasein the day and the
presence of sunlight no longer have such a special function as they have
for the 'primitive' Dasein on which our analysis of 'natural' time-reckoning has been based; for the 'advanced' Dasein has the 'advantage' of
even being able to turn night into day. Similarly we no longer need to
glance explicitly and immediately at the sun and its position to ascertain
the time. The manufacture and use of measuring-equipment of one's
own permits one to read off the time directly by a dock produced especially for this purpose. The "what 0' dock is it?" is the 'what time is it?'
Because the dock-in the sense of that which makes possible a public way
of time-reckoning-must be regulated by the 'natural' dock, even the
use of docks as equipment is based upon Dasein's temporality, which,
with the disclosedness of the "there", first makes possible a dating of the
time with which we concern ourselves; this is a fact, even if it is covered
up when the time is read off. Our understanding of the natural clock
develops with the advancing discovery of Nature, and instructs us as to new
possibilities for a kind of time-measurement which is relatively independent
of the day and ofany explicit observation of the sky.
But in a certain manner even 'primitive' Dasein makes itself independent of reading off the time directly from the sky, when instead of
ascertaining the sun's position it measures the shadow cast by sorne entity
available at any time. This can happen in the first instance in the simplest
form of the ancient 'peasant's dock'. Everyman is constantly accompanied

Being q,nd Time
469
by a shadow; and in the shadow the sun is encountered with respect to its
changing presence at different places. In the daytime, shadows have
different lengths which can be paced off 'at any time'. Even ifindividuals
differ in the lengths of their bodies and feet, the relationship between them
remains constant within certain limits of accuracy. Thus, for example,
when one is concerned with making an appointment, one designates the
time publidy by saying, 'When the shadow is so many feet long, then
we shall meet yonder.' Here in Being with one another within the rather
narrow boundaries of an environment which is very dose to us, it is
tacitly presupposed that the 'locations' at which the shadow gets paced
off are at the same latitude. This dock is one which Dasein does
not have to carryaround with it; in a certain manner Dasein itself is
the dock.
The public sundial, in which the line of a .shadow is counterposed to
the course of the sun and moves along a numbered track, needs no further
description. But why is it that at the position which the shadow occupies
on the dial we always find something like time? Neither the shadow nor
the divided track is time itself, nor is the spatial relationship between
them. Where, then, is the time, which we thus read off directly not only
on the 'sundial' but also on any pocket watch?
What does "reading off the time" signify? 'Looking at the dock' does
indeed amount to more than observing the changes in sorne item of
equipment which is ready-to-hand, and following the positions of a
pointer. When we use a dock in ascertaining what o'dock it is, we saywhether explicitly or not-"It is now such and such an hour and so many
minutes; now is the time for . . ." or "there is still time enough now
until •. .". Looking at the dock is based on taking our time, and is
guided by it. What has already shown itself in the most elementary timereckoning here becomes plainer: when we look at the dock and regulate
ourselves according to the time, we are essentially saying "now". Here the
"now" has in each case already been understood and interpreted in its full
structural content of datability, spannedness, publicness, and worldhood.
This is so 'obvious' that we take no note of it whatsoever; stilliess do we
know anything about it explicitly.
Saying "now", however, is the discursive Articulation of a makingpresent which temporalizes itself in a unitYwith a retentive awaiting. The
dating which is performed when one uses a dock, turns out to be a distinctive way in which something present-at-hand is made present. Dating
does not simply relate to something present-at-hand; this kind of relating 4 1 7
has itself the character of measuring. Ofcourse the number which we get by
measuring can be read off immediately. But this implies that when a

Il. 6

470
Being and Time
II. 6
stretch is to be measured, we understand that our standard is, in a way,
contained in it; that is, we determine the frequency of its presence in that
stretch. Measuring is constituted temporally when a standard which has
presence is made present in a stretch which has presence. The idea
of a standard implies unchangingness; this means that for everyone
at any time the standard, in its stability, must be present-at-hand.
When the time with which one concerns oneself is dated by measuring,
one interprets it by looking at something present-at-hand and making it
present-something which would not become accessible as a standard or
as something measured except by our making it present in this distinctive
manner. Because the making-present of something having presence has
a special priority in dating by measuring, the measurement in which one
reads off the time by the dock also expresses itselfwith special emphasis in
the "now". Thus when time is measured, it is made public in such a way that
it is encountered on each occasion and at any time for everyone as 'now
and now and now'. This time which is 'universally' accessible in docks is
something that we come across as a present-at-hand multiplicity of "nows",
so to speak, though the measuring of time is not directed thematically
towards time as such.
The temporality of factical Being-in-the-world is what primordially
makes the disdosure of space possible; and in each case spatial Dasein
has--out of a "yonder" which has been discovered-allotted itself a
"here" which isofthe character of Dasein. Because ofall this the time with
which Dasein concerns itselfin its temporality is, as regards its datability,
always bound up with sorne location of that Dasein. Time itself does not
get linked to a location; but temporality is the condition for the possibility
that dating may be bound upwith thespatially-Iocal in such a waythat this
may be binding for everyone as a measure. Time does not first get coupled
with space; but the 'space' which one might suppose to be coupled with
it, is encountered only on the basis of the temporality which concerns itself
with time. Inasmuch as both time-reckoning and the dock are founded
upon the temporality of Dasein, which is constitutive for this entity as
historical, it may be shown to what extent, ontologically, the use of docks
is itself historical, and to what extent every dock as such 'has a history',1v
The time which is made public by our measuring it, does not by any
means turn into space because we date it in terms ofspatial measurementrelations. Still less is what is existential-ontologically essential in the
measuring of time to be sought in the fact that dated 'time' is determined
numerically in terms of spatial stretches and in changes in the location of
sorne spatial Thing. What is ontologically decisive lies rather in the
specifie kind of making-present which makes measurement possible. Dating

II. 6

Being and Time

.1 7 1

in t~rms of wh~t is 'spatially' present-at-hand is so far from a spatializing
of~e th~t t~IS supposed spatialization signifies nothing else than that an
entlty ",:hl~h IS present-at-hand for everyone in every "now" is made
present m ItS own presence. Measuring time is essentially such that it is
necessary to say "now"; but in obtaining the measurement, we, as it
were, forget what has been measured as such, so that nothing is to be
found except a number and a stretch.
When Dasein concerns itself with time, then the less time it has to lose
the more 'precious' does that time become, and the handier the dock mus~
be. Not onl~ s~ould we be able to assign the time 'more precisely', but the
~ery dete~mmmgof ~he time should daim as little time as possible, though
It must stlll agree wlth the ways in which Others assign time.
Provisionally it was enough for us to point out the general 'connection'
of the use of docks with that temporality which takes its time. Just as the
concrete analysis of astronomical time-reckoning in its full development
belongs to the existential-ontological Interpretation of how Nature is
discovere~, the foundati~ns.ofhistorio.logicaland calendrical 'chronology'
can be laId bare only wtthm the orbtt of the tasks of analysing historiological cognition existentially.v
The measurement of time gives it a marked public character so that
only in this way does what we generally call 'the time' become weli known.
In concern every Thing has 'its time' attributed to it. It 'has' it, and, like
every entity within-the-world, it can 'have' it only because after aIl it is
'in time'. That time 'wherein' entities within-the-world are encountered ,
we know as "world-time". By reason of the ecstatico-horizonal constitution of the temporality which belongs to it, this has the same
transcendence as the world itself. With the disdosedness of the world
world-time has been made public, so that every temporally concernfulBein~
~ongside entities within-the-world understands these entities circumspectlvely as encountered 'in time'.
The time 'in which' the present-at-hand is in motion or at rest is
~t 'Objective', if what we mean by that is the Being-present-at-hand-inItself of entities encountered within-the-world. But just as Little is time
'subjective', if by this we understand Being-present-at-hand and occurring in a 'subject'. World-time is 'more Objective' than any possible Object
because, with the disclosedness of the world, it already becomes 'Objectified' in an
ecstatico-hori;:;onal manner as the condition for the possibility of entities within-thewarld. Thus, contrary to Kant's opinion, one cornes across world-time
just as immediately in the physical as in the psychical, and not just
roundabout by way of the psychical. 'Time' fust shows itself in the
skY-precisely where one cornes across it when one regulates oneself

420

472
Being and Time
II. 6
naturallyaccording to it-so that 'time' even becomes identified with the sky.
IWorld-time, moreover, is also 'more subjective' than any possible subject; for it is
what first makes possible the Being of thefactically existing Self-that Being which,
as is now well understood, is the meaning of care. 'Time' is present-at-hand
neither in the 'subject' nor in the 'Object', neither 'inside' nor 'outside';
and it 'is' 'earlier' than any subjectivity or Objectivity, because it presents
the condition for the very possibility of this 'earlier'. Has it then any
'Being'? And if not, is it then a mere phantom, or is it something that has
'more Being' ["seiender"] than any possible entity? Any investigation
which goes further in the direction of questions such as these, will come
up against the same 'boundary' which has already set itself up to our
provisional discussion of the connection between truth and Being.Vi In
whatever way these questions may be answered in what follows--<>r in
whatever way they may first of aIl get primordially formulated-we must
first understand that temporality, as ecstatico-horizonal, temporalizes
something like world-time, which constitutes a within-time-ness of the
ready-to-hand and the present-at-hand. But in that case such entities
can never be designated as 'temporal' in the strict sense. Like every entity
with a character other than that of Dasein, they are non-temporal,
whether they Really occur, arise and pass away, or subsist 'ideally'.
If world-time thus belongs to the temporalizing of temporality, thenit can
neither be volatilized 'subjectivisticaIly' nor 'reified' by a vicious 'Objectification'. These two possibilities can be avoided with a dear insight-not
just bywavering insecurelybetween them--<>nly ifwe can understand how
everyday Dasein conceives of 'time' theoretically in terms of an understanding of time in the way which is dosest to it, and if we can also
understand to what extent this conception of time and the prevalence of this
concept obstruct the possibility of our understanding in terms of primordial time what is meant by this conception-that is, the possibilityof
understanding it as temporality. The everyday concern which gives itself
time, finds 'the time' in those entities within-the-world which are encountered 'in time'. So if we are to cast any light on the genesis of the ordinary
conceptionof time, wemust takewithin-time-ness as our point ofdeparture.
~ 81. Withi~time-ness and the Genesis

of the Ordinary Conception of Time

How doessomething like 'time' first show itself for everyday circumspective concern?' In what kind of concernful equipment-using dealings
does it become explicitly accessible? If it has been made public with the
disdosedness of the world, if it has always been already a matter of
concern with the discoveredness of entities within-the-world-a discoveredness which belongs to the world's disclosedness-and if it has been

Il.6
Being and Time
473
a matter of such concern in so far as Dasein calculates time in reckoning
with itselJ, then the kind of behaviour in which 'one' explicitly regulates
oneself according to time, lies in the use of docks. The existential-temporal
meaning ofthis turns out to be a making-present of the travelling pointer.
By following the positions of the pointer in a way which makes present,
one counts them. This making-present temporalizes itself in the ecstatical
unity of a retention which awaits. To retain the 'on that former occasion'
and to retain it by making it present, signifies that in saying "now" one
is open for the horizon of the earlier-that is, of the "now-no-longer". To
await the 'then' by making it present, means that in saying "now" one is
open for the horizon of the later-that is, of the "now-not-yet". Time is
what shows itself in such a making-present. How then, are we to define the
time which is manifest within the horizon of the circumspective concernful
clock-using in which one takes one's time? This time is that which is
counted and which shows itself when one follows the travelling pointer, counting
and making present in such a way that this making-present temporali;:,es itself in an
ecstatical unity with the retaining and awaiting which are hori;:,onally open according
to the "earlier" and"later". This, however, is nothing else than an existential.
ontological interpretation of Aristotle's definition of "time": TOVrO yap
JOTW 8 xp6v 0 S', âp,O,."oS' K'vrJUEWS' KaTa T6 7Tp6TEPOV Kal vunpov.
"For this is time: that which is counted in the movement which we
encounter within the horizon of the earlier and later."vl1 This definition
may seem strange at first glance; but if one defines the existentialontological horizon from which Aristotle has taken it, one sees that it is as
'obvious' as it at first seems strange, and has been genuinely derived. The
source of the time which is thus manifest does not become a problem for
Aristotle. His Interpretation of time moves rather in the direction of the
'natural' way of understanding Being. Yet because this very understanding and the Being which is thus understood have in principle been made
a problem for the investigation which lies before us, it is only after we have
found a solution for the question of Being that the Aristotelian analysis of
cime can be Interpreted thematically in such a way that it may indeed
gain sorne signification in principle, if the formulation of this question in
ancient ontology, with aIl its criticallimitations, is to be appropriated in
a positive manner.vUi
Ever since Aristotle aIl discussions of the concept of time have dung
in principle to the Aristotelian definitions; that is, in taking cime as their
theme, they have taken it as it shows itself in circumspective concern.
Time is what is 'counted'; that is to say, it is what is expressed and what
we have in view, even if unthematicaIly, when the travelling pointer (or
the shadow) is made present. When one makes present that which is

421

474
Being and Time
II. 6
moved in its movement, one says 'now here, now here, and so on'. The
"nows" are what get counted. And these show themselves 'in every "now'"
as "nows" whieh will 'forthwith be no-Ionger-now' and "nows" which
have 'just been not-yet-now'.1 The world-time which is 'sighted' in this
manner in the use of docks, we call the "now-time" [Jetzt-Zeit].
422
When the concern whieh gives itself cime reckons with time, the
more 'naturally' it does so, the less it dwells at the expressed cime as such;
on the contrary, it is lost in the equipment with which it concerns itself,
which in each case has a time of its own. When concern determines the
time and assigns it, the more 'naturally' it does so-that is, the less it is
directed towards treating time as such thematically-all the more does
the Being which is alongside the object of concern (the Being which falls
as it makes present) say unhesitatingly (whether or not anything is
uttered) "now" or "then" or "on that former occasion". Thus for the
ordinary understanding of time, time shows itself as a sequence of "nows"
which are constantly 'present-at-hand', simultaneously passing away
and coming along. Time is understood as a succession, as a 'Rowing
stream' of "nows", as the 'course of time'. What is implied by such an
interpretation of the world-time with which we concern ourselves?
We get the answer ifwe go back to thefull essential str~cture ofworldtime and compare this with that with which the ordinary understanding
of time is acquainted. We have exhibited datability as the first essential
item in the time with which we concern ourselves. This is grounded
in the ecstatical constitution of temporality. The 'now' is essentially
a "now that ...". The datable "now", which is understood in concern
even if we cannot grasp it as such, is in each case one which is either
appropriate or inappropriate. Signi.ficance belongs to the structure of the
"now". We have accordingly called the time with which we concern
ourselves "world-time". In the ordinary interpretations of time as a
sequence of "nows", both datability and significance are missing. These
two structures are not permitted to 'come to the fore' when time is characterized as a pure succession. The ordinary interpretation of time covers
them up. When these are covered up, the ecstatico-horizonal constitution
oftemporality, in which the datability and the significance of the "now"
are grounded, gets levelled off. The "nows" get shorn of these relations as
it were; and, as thus shorn, they simply range themselves along after ~ne
another so as to make up the succession.
It is no accident that world-time thus gets levelled off and covered up
by the way time is ordinarily understood. But just because the everyday
l 'UJ?'d d!ese ~e,ige~ sich ."in jedem Jetzt" aIs "sogleich-nicht-mehr •••" und "ebennoch-mcht-Jetzt . It IS pOSSible to read the hyphenated expressions in other ways.

Il. 6

Being and Time
475
interpretation of time maintains itself by looking solely in the direction of
concernful common sense, and understands only what 'shows' itselfwithin
the common-sense horizon, these structures must escape it. That which gets
counted when one measures time concernfully, the "now", gets co-understood in one's concern with the present-at-hand and the ready-to-hand.
Now so far as this concern with time cornes back to the time itself which
has been co-understood, and in so far as it 'considers' that time, it sees the
"nows" (which indeed are also somehow 'there') within the horizon ofthat
understanding-of-Being by which this concern is itselfconstantly guided. 1X 4 2 3
Thus the "nows" are in a certain manner co-present-at-hand: that is, entities
are encountered, and so too is the "now". Although it is not said explicitly
that the "nows" are present-at-hand in the same way as Things, they still
get 'seen' ontologically within the horizon of the idea ofpresence-at-hand.
The "nows" pass away, and those which have passed away make up the
pasto The "nows" come along, and those which are coming along define the
'future'. The ordinary interpretation of world-time as now-time never
avails itself of the horizon by which such things as world, significance,
and datability can be made accessible. These structures necessarily remain
covered up, all the more so because this covering-up is reinforced by the
way in which the ordinary interpretation develops its characterization of
time conceptually.
The sequence of "nows" is taken as something that is somehow presentat-hand, for it even moves 'into cime'. 1 We say: 'Inevery "now" is now;
in every "now" it is already vanishing.' In every "now" the "now" is now
and therefore it constantly has presence as something selfsame, even though
in every "now" another may be vanishing as it cornes along. 1l Yet as this
thing which changes, it simultaneously shows its own constant presence.
Thus even Plato, who directed his glance in this manner at time as a
sequence of "nows" arising and passing away, had to call time "the
image of eternity": €lKW 8' l7T€VOn KW7JTOV T,va alwvos 7To'fjua" Kal.
8,aKoup.<Ôv tÏpoa ovpaV6V 7To,€i polvOVTOS alWvos lv bl. KaT' c1p,Opo6V lovuav
"
"
....
fi
II xpovov
'
t
1
X
a,wv,ov
nKova,
TOVTOV
ov
V'I
wvopoaKap.€V.

The sequence of"nows" is uninterrupted and has no gaps. No matter how
'far' we proceed in 'dividing up' the "now", it is always now. The continuity 3 of time is seen within the horizon ofsomething which is indissolubly
l ' ••• denn sie rückt selbst "in die Zeit".'

li 'In jedem Jetzt ist das Jetzt Jetzt, mithin standig aIs Selbiges anwesend, mag auch in

jedemJetztje ein anderes ankommend verschwinden.'
li 'Stetigkeit'. In the earlier editions this appears as 'Stiitigkeit'-a spelling which we
find on H. 390 f. and 398 in both earlier and later editions. It is not clear how seriously
this 'correction' is to be taken here; but we have decided, with some hesitation, to translate 'Statigkeit' as 'steadiness', and 'stetig' and 'Stetigkeit' as 'continuous' and 'continuity'
respectiveIy, saving 'Continuous' and 'Continuity' for 'kontinuierlich' and 'Kontinuitiit'.

476
Being and Time
II. 6
present-at-hand. When one takes one's ontological orientation from
something that is constantly present-at-hand, one either looks for the
problem of the Continuity of time or one leaves this impasse alone. In
either case the specifie structure of world-time must remain covered up.
Together with datability (which has an ecstatical foundation) it has been
spanned. The spannedness
of time is not to be understood in terms of the
1
horizonal stretching-along of the ecstatical unitY of that temporality which
has made itself public in one's concern with time. The fact that in every
"now", no matter how momentary, it is in each case already now, must be
conceived in terms of something which is 'earlier' still and from which
every "now" stems: that is to say, it must be conceived in terms of the
ecstatical stretching-along of that temporality which is alien to any
424 Continuity of something present-at-hand but which, for its part, presents
the condition for the possibility of access to anything continuous 1 that is
present-at-hand.
The principal thesis of the ordinary way ofinterpreting time-namely,
that time is 'infinite'-makes manifest most impressively the way in which
world-time and accordingly temporality in general have been levelled off
and covered up by such an interpretation. It is held that time presents
itself proximally as an uninterrupted sequence of "nows". Every "now",
moreover, is already either a ''just-now'' or a "forthwith". 2 If in characterizing time we stick primarily and exdusively to such a sequence, then
in principle neither beginning nor end can be found in it. Every last
"now", as "now", is always already a "forthwith" that is no longer [ein
Sofort-nicht-mehr]; thus it is time in the sense of the "no-Ionger-now"in the sense of the pasto Every first "now" is a "just-now" that is not yet
[ein Soeben-noch-nicht]; thus it is time in the sense of the "not-yetnow"-in the sense of the 'future'. Renee time is endless 'on both sides'.
This thesis becomes possible only on the basis of an orientation towards a
free-floating "in-itseif" of a course of "nows" which is present-at-hand-an
orientation in which the full phenomenon of the "now" has been covered
up with regard to its datability, its worldhood, its spannedness, and its
character
of having a location of the same kind as Dasein's, so that it has
.
dwmdled to an unrecognizable fragment. If one directs one's glance
towards Being-present-at-hand and not-Being-present-at-hand, and thus
'thinks' the sequence of "nows" through 'to the end', then an end can
never be found. In this way of thinking time through to the end, one must
always think more time; from this one infers that time is infinite.
But wherein are grounded this levelling-off of world-time and this
1 " , , Stetigen .• .' The earlier editions have 'Stâtigen'.
:1

'Jedesjetzt ist auch schon ein Soeben bzw Sofort.'

Il.6
Being and Time
477
covering-up of temporality ? In the Being of Dasein itself, which we have,
in a preparatory manner, Interpreted as care. xi Thrown and falling,
Dasein is proximally and for the most part lost in that with which it
concerns itself. In this lostness, however, Dasein's fleeing in the face of
that authentic existence which has been characterized as "anticipatory
resoluteness", has made itselfknown; and this is a fleeing which covers up.
In this concernful fleeing lies a fleeing in the face of death-that is, a
looking-away from the end of Being-in-the-world.x1i This looking-away
from it, is in itselfa mode ofthat Being-towards-the-end which is ecstatically
futural. The inauthentic temporality of everyday Dasein as it falls, must, as
such a looking-away from finitude, fail to recognize authentic futurity and
therewith temporality in general. And if indeed the way in which Dasein
is ordinarily understood is guided by the "they", only so can the selfforgeûul 'representation' of the 'infinity' of public time be strengthened.
The "they" never dies because it cannot die; for death is in each case mine,
and only in anticipatory resoluteness does it get authentically understood
in an existentiell manner. Nevertheless, the "they", which never dies and
which misunderstands Being-towards-the-end, gives a characteristic interpretation to fleeing in the face of death. To the very end 'it always has
more time'. Rere a way of "having time" in the sense that one can lose it
makes itselfknown. 'Right now, this! then that! And that is barely over,
when .. .'1 Rere it is not as if the finitude oftime were getting understood;
quite the contrary, for concern sets out to snatch as much as possible from
the time which still keeps coming and 'goes on'. Publicly, time is something
which everyone takes and can take. In the everyday way in which we are
with one another, the levelled-offsequence of "nows" remains completely
unrecognizable as regards its origin in the temporality of the individual
Dasein. How is 'time' in its course to be touched even the least bit when a
man who has been present-at-hand 'in time' no longer exists?2 Time goes
on, just as indeed it already 'was' when a man 'came into life'. The only
time one knows is the public time which has been levelled off and which
belongs to everyone-and that means, to nobody.
But just as he who flees in the face of death is pursued by it even as
he evades it, and just as in turning away from it he must see it none the
less, even the innocuous infinite sequence of "nows" which simply runs
its course, imposes itself 'on' Dasein in a remarkably enigmatical way.3
1 '. , • "jetzt erst noch das, dann das, und nur noch das und dann •.•" ,

'Die nivellierte jetztfoIge bleibt viillig unkenntIich bezüglich ihrer Herkunft aus der
ZeitIichkeit des einzelnen Daseins im alItaglichen Miteinander. Wie soli das auch "die
Zeit" im mindesten in ihrem Gang berühren, wenn ein "in der Zeit" vorhandener
Mensch nicht mehr existiert?'
3 ' ••• so Iegt sich auch die Iediglich ablaufende, harmlose, unendliche FoIge der jetzt
doch in einer merkwürdigen Ratselhaftigkeit "über" das Dasein.'
:1

425

426

47 8
Being and Time
II.6
Why do we say that time passes away, when we do not say withjust as much
emphasis that it arises? Yet with regard to the pure sequence of "nows"
we have as much right to say one as the other. When Dasein talks oftime's
passing away, it understands, in the end, more of time than it wants to
admit; that is to say, the temporality in which world-time temporalizes
itself has not been completely closed off, no matter how much it may get
covered up. Our talk about time's passing-away gives expression to this
'experience': time does not let itself be halted. This 'experience' in turn
is possible only because the halting of time is something that we want.
Herein lies an inauthentic awaiting of 'moments'-an awaiting in which
these are already forgotten as they glide by. The awaiting of inauthentic
existence-the awaiting which forgets as it makes present-is the condition
for the possibility of the ordinary experience of time's passing-away.
Because Dasein is futural in the "ahead-of~itself", it must, in awaiting,
understand the sequence of "nows" as one which glides by as it passes
away. Dasein knows fugitive time in terms of its 'fugitive' knowledge about its
death. In the kind of talk which emphasizes time's passing away, the finite
futurity of Dasein's temporality is publicly reflected. And because even in
talk about time's passing away, death can remain covered up, time shows
itself as a passing-away 'in itself'.
But even in this pure sequence of "nows" which passes away in itself,
primordial time still manifests itself throughout aIl this levelling off and
covering up. In the ordinary interpretation, the stream of time is defined
as an irreversible succession. Why cannot time be reversed? Especially if one
looks exclusivelyat the stream of "nows", it is incomprehensible in itself
why this sequence should not present itself in the reverse direction. The
impossibility of this reversaI has its basis in the way public time originates
in temporality, the temporalizing ofwhich is primarily futural and 'goes'
to its end ecstatically in such a way that it 'is' already towards its end.
The ordinary way of characterizing time as an endless, irreversible
sequence of "nows" which passes away, arises from the temporality of
falling Dasein. The ordinary representation of time has its natural justification. 1t
belongs to Dasein's average kind of Being, and to that understanding of
Being which proximally prevails. Thus proximally and for the most part,
even history gets understood publuly as happening within-time. 1 This interpretation of time loses its exclusive and pre-eminent justification only if
it claims to convey the 'true' conception oftime and to be able to prescribe
the sole possible horizon within which time is to be Interpreted. On the
contrary, it has emerged that why and how world-time belongs to Dasein's

Il.6
Being and Time
479
temporality is intelligible only in terms of that temporality and its temporalizing. From temporality the full structure ofworld-time has been drawn;
and only the Interpretation of this structure gives us the clue for 'seeing'
at all that in the ordinary conception of time something has been covered
up, and for estimating how much the ecstatico-horizonal constitution of
temporality has been levelled off. This orientation by Dasein's temporality
indeed makes it possible to exhibit the origin and the factical necessity of
this levelling off and covering up, and at the same time to test the arguments for the ordinary theses about time.
On the other hand, within the horizon of the way time is ordinarily
understood, temporality is inaccessible in the reverse direction. 1 Not only must
the now-time be orientedprimarily by temporality in the order of possible
interpretation, but it temporalizes itself only in the inauthentic temporality of Dasein; so if one has regard for the way the now-time is derived
from temporality, one is justified in considering temporality as the time
which isprimordial.
Ecstatico-horizonal temporality temporalizes itself primarily in terms of
the future. In the way time is ordinarily understood, however, the basic
phenomenon of time is seen in the "now", and indeed in that pure "now"
which has been shorn in its full structure-that which they call the 'Pre- 4 2 7
sent'. One can gather from this that there is in principle no prospect that
in terms ofthis kind of "now" one can clarify the ecstatico-horizonal phenomenon of the moment of vision which belongs to temporality, or even that
one can derive it thus. Correspondingly, the future as ecstatically understood-the datable and significant 'then'-<l.oes not coincide with the
ordinary conception of the 'future' in the sense of a pure "now" which
has not yet come along but is only coming along. And the concept of the
past in the sense of the pure "now" which has passed away, is just
as far from coinciding with the ecstatical "having-been"-the datable
and significant 'on a former occasion'. The "now" is not pregnant with
the "not-yet-now", but the Present arises from the future in the primordial ecstatical unity of the temporalizing of temporality.x1i1
Although, proximally and for the most part, the ordinary experience of
time is one that knows only 'world-time', it always gives it a distinctive
relationship to 'sou!' and 'spirit', even if this is still a far cry from a
philosophical inquiry ~riented explicitly and primarily towards the
'subject'. As evidence for this, two characteristic passages will suffice.
Aristotle says: €l 8€ p.7j8€v à'\'\o 1T€ePVK€V àpdJp.€îv ~ .pvx~ Ka~ ifiuxfjs vous,
à8wa'Tov €lva, xp6vov .pvxfjs p.~ oVu7js• •.• xlv And Saint Augustine writes:

l 'Daher wird auch zunachst und zumeist die Geschû:hte iljfentlich aIs inner:::eitiges Gescheher. verstanden.' The words 'offentlich ais' are italicized only in the later editions.

l 'Dagegen bleibt umgekehrt die Zeitlichkeit im Horizont des vulgaren Zeitverstandnisses un;;ugiinglÛ:h.'

480
Being and Time
II.6
"inde mihi visum est, nihil esse aliud tempus quam distentionem,o sed cuius rei nescio;
et mirum si non ipsius animi."xv Thus in principle even the Interpretation of
Dasein as temporality does not lie beyond the horizon of the ordinary conceptionoftime. And Hegelhas made an explicit attempt to set forth theway
in which time as ordinarily understood is connected with spirit. In Kant,
on the other hand, while time is indeed 'subjective', it stands 'beside'
the '1 think' and is not bound up with it. xv1 The grounds which Hegel has
explicitly provided for the connection between time and spirit are weU
suited to elucidate indirectly the foregoing Interpretation of Dasein as
temporality and our exhibition of temporality as the source of worldtime.
~ 82. A Comparison of the Existential-ontological Connection of Temporality,
Dasein, and World-time, with Hegefs Way of Taking the Relation between Time
and Spirit
History, which is essentiaUy the history of spirit, runs its course 'in
time'. Thus 'the development of history faUs into time'.xviil Hegel is not
satisfied, however, with averring that the within-time-ness of spirit is a
Fact, but seeks to understand how it is possible for spirit to faU into time,
which is 'the non-sensuous sensuous'.xv111 Time must be able, as it were,
to take in spirit. And spirit in turn must be akin to time and its essence.
Accordingly two points come up for discussion: (1) how does Hegel define
the essence of time? (2) what belongs to the essence of spirit which makes
it possible for it to 'faU into time'? Our answer to these questions wiU serve
merely to elucidate our Interpretation of Dasein as temporality, and to do
so by wayofa comparison. We shaU make no claim to give even a relatively
fuU treatment of the allied problems in Hegel, especiaUy since 'criticizing'
him will not help us. Because Hegel's conception of time presents the most
radical way in which the ordinary understanding of time has been given
form conceptuaUy, and one which has received too little attention,
a comparison of this conception with the idea of temporality which we
have expounded is one that especiaUy suggests itself.

(a) Hegel's Conception of Time
When a philosophical Interpretation of time is carried out, it gets a
'locus in a system'; this locus may be considered as criterial for the basic
way of treating time by which such an Interpretation is guided. In the
.1 'A1so flillt die Entwicklung der Geschichte in die Zeit".' Throughout this section it

wIll be convenient to translate Hegel's verb 'fallen' by 'fall' though elsewhere we have
largely pre-empted this for H«:idegge.r's 've~f~lIen'. 'Ve~fall;n' does not appear until H.
43~, where we shall cali atte~tlOn ~o It ~xph~ltIy. (In thls quotation, as in several others,
Hel~egger has taken a few mmor hbertles wlth Hegel's text, which are too trivial for any
special comment.)

Il. 6

Being and Time
481
'physics' of Aristotle-that is, in the context of an ontology of Naturethe ordinary way of understanding time has received its first thematicaUy
detailed traditional interpretation. 'Time', 'location', and 'movement'
stand together. True to tradition, Hegel's analysis of time has its locus
in the second part of his Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences, which is
entitled 'Philosophy ofNature'. The first portion ofthis treats ofmechanics,
and of this the first division is devoted to the discussion of 'space and time'.
He caUs these 'the abstract "outside-of-one-another" '.xix
Though Hegel puts space and time together, this does not happen
simply because he has arranged them superficiaUy one after the other:
space, 'and time also'. 'Philosophy combats such an "also".' The transition
from space to time does not signify that these are treated in adjoining
paragraphs; rather 'it is space itselfthat makes the transition'.1 Space 'is'
time; that is, time is the 'truth' of space. xx If space is thought dialecticaUy
in that which it is, then according to Hegel this Being of space unveils itself
as time. How must space be thought?
Space is 'the unmediated indifference of Nature's Being-outside-ofitself'.xxl This is a way of saying that space is the abstract multiplicity
[Vielheit] of the points which are differentiable in it. 2 Space is not
interrupted by these; but neither does it arise from them by way of
joining them together. Though it is differentiated by differentiable points
which are space themselves, space remains, for its part, without any
differences. The differences themselves are of the same character as that
which they differentiate. Nevertheless, the point, in so far as it differentiates anything iQ space, is the negation of space, though in such a manner
that, as this negation, it itself remains in space; a point is space after aU.
The point does not lift itself out of space as if it were something of another
character. Space is the "outside-of-one-another" of the multiplicity of
points [Punktmannigfaltigkeit], and it is without any differences. But it
is not as ifspace were a point; space is rather, as Hegel says, 'punctuality'
["Punktualitat"]. xxii This is the basis for the sentence in which Hegel
thinks of space in its truth-that is, as time: 'Negativity, which relates
itself as point to space, and which develops in space its determinations as
line and surface, is, however,just as muchfor itselfin the sphere ofBeingoutside-of-itself, and so are its determinations therein, though while it is
1'. . . sondern "der Raum selbst geht über".'
li ' • . • in ihm unterscheidbaren

Punkte.' We have often translated 'unterscheiden' as

:d~stingui~h' ~r 'di~c~iminat~',.an~ 'Unterschied' as 'distinction' or 'difference', leaving

dlfferentlate and dlfferentiatlOn for such words as 'differenzieren' and 'Differenz' etc.
In this discussion of Hegel, however, it will be convenient to translate 'unterscheid;n' as
'differentiate', 'Unterschied' as 'difference', 'unterscheidbar' as 'differentiable' 'untersc,hiedslos' as 'without differences'. (We shall continue to translate 'gleichgültig as 'indlfferent'. )

43°

482
Being and Time
II. 6
positing as in the sphere of Being-outside-of-itself, it appears indifferent as
regards the things that are tranquillyside by side.As thus posited for itself,
it is time.'xxiU
If space gets represented-that is, if it gets intuited immediately in the
indifferent subsistence ofits differences-then the negations are, as it were,
simply given. But by such a representation, space does not get grasped in
its Being. Only in thinking is it possible for this to be done-in thinking as
the synthesis which has gone through thesis and antithesis and transmuted
them. Only if the negations do not simply remain subsisting in their
indifference but get transmuted-that is, only if they themselves get
negated-does space get thought and thus grasped in its Being. In the
negation of the negation (that is, of punctuality) the point posits itself
for itselj and thus emerges from the indifference ofsubsisting. As that which
is posited for itself, it differentiates itself from this one and from that one:
it is no longer this and not yet that. In positing itself for itself, it posits the
succession in which it stands-the sphere of Being-outside-of-itself, which
is by now the sphere of the negated negation. When punctuality as
indifference gets transmuted, this signifies that it no longer remains lying
in the 'paralysed tranquillity of space'. The point 'gives itself airs' before
aIl the other points. 1 According to Hegel, this negation of the negation
as punctuality is time. If this discussion has any demonstrable meaning,
it can mean nothing else than that the positing-of-itself-for-itself of every
point is a "now-here", "now-here", and so on. Every point 'is' posited
for itself as a now-point. 'In time the point thus has actuality.' That
through which each point, as this one here, can posit itself for itself, is in
each case a "now". The "now" is the condition for the possibility of the
point's positing itself for itself. This possibility-condition makes up th(
Being of the point, and Being is the same as having been thought. Thus
in each case the pure thinking of punctuality-that is, of space-'thinks'
the "now" and the Being-outside-of-itself of the "now"; because of this,
space 'is' time. How is time itself defined?
'Time, as the negative unity of Being-outside-of-itself, is likewise something simply abstract, ideaI. It is that Being which, in that it is, is not, and
which, in that it is not, is: it is intuited becoming. This means that
those differences which, to be sure, are simply momentary, transmuting
themselves immediately, are defined as external, yet as external to themselves.'xxiv For this interpretation, time reveals itself as 'intuited becoming'. According t" Hegel this signifies a transition from Being to nothing
or from nothing to Being. xxv Becoming is both arising and passing away.

Il. 6
Being and Time
483
Either Being 'makes the transition', or not-Being does so. What does this
mean with regard to time? The Being of time is the "now". Every "now",
however, either 'now' is-no-Ionger, or now is-not-yct; so it can be taken also
as not-Being. 1 Time is 'intuited' becoming-that is to say, it is the transition
which does not get thought but which simply tenders itselfin the sequence
of "nows". If the essence of time is defined as 'intuited becoming', then it
becomes manifest that time is primarily understood in terms of the
"now", and indeed in the very manner in which one cornes across such a
"now" in pure intuition.
No detailed discussion is needed to make plain that in Hegel's Interpretation of time he is moving whoIly in' the direction of the way time is
ordinarily understood. When he characterizes time in terms of the "now",
this presupposes that in its full structure the "now" remains levelled off
and covered up, so that it can be intuited as something present-at-hand,
though present-at-hand only 'ideally'.
That Hegel Interprets time in terms of this primary orientation by the
"now" which has been levelled off, is evidenced by the following
sentences: 'The "now" is monstrously privileged: it 'is' nothing but the
individual "now"; but in giving itself airs, this thing which is so exclusive
has already been dissolved, diffused, and pulverized, even while 1 am
expressing it.'xxvi 'In Nature, moreover, where time is now, no "stable"
["bestehend"] difference between these dimensions' (past and future)
'ever cornes about'.xxvii 'Thus in a positive sense one can say of time that
only the Present is; the "before" and "after" are not; but the concrete
Present is the result of the past and is pregnant with the future. Thus the
true Present is eternity.'xxviU
If Hegel calls time 'intuited becoming', then neither arising nor passing
away has any priority in time. Nevertheless, on occasion he characterizes
time as the 'abstraction of consuming' ["Abstraktion des Verzehrens"]the most radical formula for the way in which time is ordinarily experienced and interpreted. xxix On the other hand, when Hegel really defines
"time", he is consistent enough to grant no such priority to consuming
and passing away as that which the everyday way of experiencing time
rightly adheres to; for Hegel can no more provide dialectical grounds for
such a priority than he can for the 'circumstance' (which he has introduced as self-evident) that the "now" turns up precisely in the way the
point posits itself for itself. So even when he characterizes time as "becoming", Hegel understands this "becoming". in an 'abstract' sense,
which goes weIl beyond the representation of the 'stream' of time. Thus

1 'Der Punkt "spreizt sieh auf" gegenüber allen anderen Punkten.' The verb 'spreizen'
means 'to spread apart'; but when used refiexively, as here, it takes on the more specifie
connotation of swaggering, giving oneself airs.

1 'Das Sein der Zeit ist dasJetzt; sofem aber jedes Jetzt "jetzt" aueh sehon nicht-mehrbzw. je jetzt zuvor noch-nicht-ist, kann es aucb aIs Niehtsein gefasst werden.'

43 2

Being and Time
II.6
the most appropriate expression which the Hegelian treatment of time
receives, lies in his defining it as "the negation of a negation" (that is, of
punctuality). Here the sequence of "nows" has been formalized in the
most extreme sense and levelled off in such a way that one can hardly go
any farther. xxx Only from the standpoint of this formal-dialectical conception of time can Hegel produce any connection between time and
spirit.

484

433

434

(b) Hegei's Interpretation of the Connection between Time and Spirit
If Hegel can say that when spirit gets actualized, it accords with it to
fall into time, with "time" defined as a negation of a negation, how has
spirit itself been understood? The essence of spirit is the concept. By this
Hegel understands not the universal which is intuited in a genus as the
form ofsomething thought, but rather the form of the very thinking which
thinks itself: the conceiving of oneself-as the grasping of the not-I. lnasmuch
as the grasping of the not-I presents a differentiation, there lies in the pure
concept, as the grasping of this differentiation, a differentiation of the
difference. Thus Hegel can define the essence of the spirit formally and
apophantically as the negation of a negation. This 'absolute negativity'
gives a logically formalized Interpretation of Descartes' "cogito me cogitare
rem", wherein he sees the essence of the conscientia.
The concept is accordingly a self-conceiving way in which the Self has
been conceived; as thus conceived, the Self is authentically as it can bethat isfree. 1 'The ''l'' is the pure concept itself, which as concept bas come
into Dasein.'xxxl 'The "1", however, is this initiaibJ pure unity which relates
itself to itself-not immediately, but in that it abstracts from aIl determinateness and content, and goes back to the freedom of its unrestricted
self-equality.'xxxl1 Thus the "1" is 'universaiiry', but it is 'individuality'2
just as immediately.
This negating of the negation is both that which is 'absolutely restless'
in the spirit and also its self-manifestation, which belongs to its essence. The
'progression' of the spirit which actualizes itself in history, carries with it
'a principle of exclusion'.xxxm ln this exclusion, however, that which is
excluded does not get detached from the spirit; it gets surmounted. The kind
l'Der Begriff ist sonach die sich begreifende Begriffenheit des Selbst, ais welche das
Selbst eigentlich ist, wie es sein kann, das heisstfrei.' The noun 'Begriffenheit' is of course
derived from 'begriffen', the past participle of 'begreifen' ('to conceive' or 'to grasp').
'Begriffen', however, may aIso be used when we would say that someone is 'in the proc~
of' doing something. This would suggest the alternative translation: 'The concept IS
accordingly a self-conceiving activity of the Self-an activity of such a nature that when
the Selfperforms it, it is authentically as it can be-namely,free.'
Il' "Einzelheit" '. We take this reading from Lasson's edition of Hegel, which Heidegger
cites. The oIder editions of Heidegger's work have 'Einzelnheit'; the newer ones have
'Einzenheit'. Presumably these are bath misprints.

II. 6

Being and Time
485
of making-itself-free which overcomes and at the same time tolerates, is
characteristic of the freedom of the spirit. Thus 'progress' never signifies
a merely quantitative "more", but is essentially qualitative and indeed
has the quality of spirit. 'Progression' is done knowingly and knows itself
in its goal. In every step of its 'progress' spirit has to overcome 'itself'
"as the truly malignant obstacle to that goal".xxxIV ln its development
spirit aims 'to reach its own concept'.xxxvThedevelopment itselfis 'a hard,
unending battle against itself'.xxxvi
Because the restlessness with which spirit develops in bringing itself to
its concept is the negation of a negation, it accords with spirit, as it actualizes
itself, to fall 'into time' as the immediate negation of a negation. For 'time is
the concept itself, which is there [da ist] and which represents itself to the
consciousness as an empty intuition; because of this, spirit necessarily
appears in time, and it appears in time as long as it does not grasp its pure
concept-that is, as long as time is not annulled by it. Time is the pure
Self-externai, intuited, not grasped by the Self-the concept which is merely
intuited.'xxxvl1 Thus by its very essence spirit necessarily appears in time.
'World-history is therefore, above aIl, the interpretation of spirit in time,
just as in space the idea interprets itself as Nature.'xxxvl1 The 'exclusion'
which belongs to the movement of development harbours in itself a
relationship to not-Being. This is time, understood in terms of the "now"
which gives itself airs.
Time is 'abstract' negativity. As 'intuited becoming', iris the differentiated self-differentiation which one cornes across immediately; it is the
concept which 'is there' ["daseiende"]-but this means present-at-hand.
As something present-at-hand and· thus external to spirit, time has no
power over the concept, but the concept is rather 'the power oftime'.xxxlx
By going back to the seifsameness of the formai structure which both spirit and
time possess as the negation of a negation, Hegel shows how it is possible for
spirit to be actualized historically 'in time'. Spirit and time get disposed
of with the very emptiest of formal-ontological and formal-apophantical
abstractions, and this makes it possible to produce a kinship between
them. But because time simultaneously gets conceived in the sense of a
world-time which has been utterly leveUed off, so that its origin remains
completely concealed, it simply gets contrasted with spirit--eontrasted as
something that is present-at-hand. Because of this, spirit must first of ail
fail 'into time'. It remains obscure what indeed is signified ontologically
by this 'falling' or by the 'actualizing' of a spirit which has power over
time and reaUy 'is' ["seienden"] outside ofit.Just as Hegel casts liùle light on
the source of the time which has thus been levelled off, he leaves totally
unexamined the question of whether the way in which spirit is essentially

435

486
Being and Time
II. 6
constituted as the negating of a negation, is possible in any other manner
than on the basis of primordial temporality.
We cannot as yet discuss whether Hegel's Interpretation of time and
spirit and the connection between them is correct and rests on foundations
which are ontologically primordial. But the very fact that a formaldialectical 'construction' of this connection can be ventured at alt, makes
manifest that these are primordially akin. Hegel's 'construction' was
prompted by his arduous struggle to conceive the 'concretion' of the spirit.
He makes this known in the following sentence from the conc1uding
chapter of his Phenomenology of the Spirit: 'Thus time appears as the very
fate and necessity which spirit has when it is not in itself complete: the
necessity of its giving self-consciousness a richer share in consciousness, of
its setting in motion the immediacy of the "in-itself" (the form in which
substance is in consciousness), or, conversely, of its realizing and making
manifest the "in-itself" taken as the inward (and this is what first is inward)
-that is, of vindicating it for its certainty of itself.'xl
Our existential analytic of Dasein, on the contrary, starts with the
'concretion' of factically thrown existence itself in order to unveil temporality as that which primordially makes such existence possible. 'Spirit'
does not first fall into time, but it exists as the primordial temporalizing
of temporality. Temporality temporalizes world-time, within the horizon
ofwhich 'history' can 'appear' as historizing within-time. 'Spirit' does not
fall into time; but factical existence 'faIls' as falling from primordial,
authentic temporality.l This 'falling' ["Fallen"], however, has itself its
existential possibility in a mode of its temporalizing-a mode which
belongs to temporality.
~ 83. The Existential-temporal Anarytic of Dasein, and the Question of Fundamental Ontology as to the Meaningof Being in General
In our considerations hitherto, our task has been to Interpret the
primordial whole offactical Dasein with regard to its possibilities of authentic
and inauthentic existing, and to do so in anexistential-ontological manner
in terms of its very basis. Temporality has manifested itself as this basis and
accordingly as the meaning of the Being of care. So that which our
preparatory existential analytic of Dasein contributed before temporality
was laid bare, has now been taken back into temporality as the primordial
structure of Dasein's totality of Being. In terms of the possible ways in
which primordial time can temporalize itself, we have provided the
1 'Der "Geist" fallt nicht in die Zeit, sondem: die faktische Existenz "fâllt" ais verfallende aus der ursprünglichen, eigentlichen Zeitlichkeit.' The contrast between Hegel's
verb 'fallen' and Heidegger's 'verfallen' is obscured byour translating them both as 'fall'.
Cf. our note l, p. 480, H. 428.

Il.6
Being and Time
487
'grounds' for those structures which were just 'pointed out' in our earlier
treatment. Nevertheless, our way of exhibiting the constitution of Dasein's
Being remains only one way which we may take. Our aim is to work out the
question of Being in general. The thematic analytic of existence, however,
first needs the light of the idea ofBeing in general, which must be c1arified
beforehand. This holds particularly ifwe adhere to the principle which we
expressed in our introduction as one by which any philosophical investigation may be gauged: that philosophy "is universal phenomenological
ontology, and takes its departure from the hermeneutic ofDasein, which,
as an analytic of existence, has made fast the guiding-line for aIl philosophical inquiry at the point where it arises and to which it returns."xl1
This thesis, of course, is to be regarded not as a dogma, but rather as a
formulation of a problem of principle which still remains 'veiled': can
one provide ontological grounds for ontology, or does it also require an
ontical foundation? and which entity must take over the function of providing this foundation?
The distinction between the Being of existing Dasein and the Being of
entities, such as Reality, which do not have the character of Dasein, may
appear very illuminating; but it is still only the point of departure for the 437
ontological problematic; it is nothing with which philosophy may tranquillize itself. 1t has long been known that ancient ontology works with 'Thingconcepts' and that there is a danger of 'reifying consciousness'. But what
does this "reifying" signify? Where does it arise? Why does Being get 'conceived' 'pïOximaIly' in terms of the present-at-hand and not in terms of the
ready-to-hand, which indeed lies closer to us? Why does this reifying always
keep coming back to exercise its dominion? What positive structure does
the Being of 'consciousness' have, if reification remains inappropriate to
it? Is the 'distinction' between 'consciousness' and 'Thing' sufficient for
tackling the ontological problematic in a primordial manner? Do the
answers to these questions lie along our way? And can we even seek
the answer as long as the question of the meaning ofBeing remains unformulated and unclarified?
One can never carry on researches into the source and the possibility of
the 'idea' of Being in general simply by means of the 'abstractions' of
formallogic-that is, without any secure horizon for question and answer.'
One must seek a way of casting light on the fundamental question of ontology, and this is the way one must go. Whether this is the only way or even
the right one at aIl, can be decided only after one has gone along it. The
conflict as to the Interpretation of Being cannot be aIlayed, because it has
not yet been enkindled. And in the end this is not the kind of conflict one
can 'bluster into'; it is of the kind which cannot get enkindled unless

488
Being and Time
II.6
preparations are made for it. Towards this alone the foregoing investigation is on the way. And where does this investigation stand?
Something like 'Being' has been disclosed in the understanding-ofBeing which belongs to existent Dasein as a way in which it understands.
Being has been disclosed in a preliminary way, though non-conceptuaIly;
and this makes it possible for Dasein as existent Being-in-the-world to
cornport itself towards entities-towards those which it encounters withinthe-world as weIl as towards itself as existent. How is this disclosive understanding of Being at ail possiblefor Dasein? Can this question be answered by
going back to the primordial constitution-oJ-Being of that Dasein by which
Being is understood? The existential-ontological constitution of Dasein's
totality is grounded in temporality. Hence the ecstatical projection of
Being must be made possible by sorne primordial way in which ecstatical
temporality temporalizes. How is this mode of the temporalizing of
temporality to be Interpreted ? Is there a way which leads from primordial
time to the meaning of Being? Does time itself manifest itselfas the horizon
of Being?

AUTHOR'S NOTES
Foreword
i. (H. 1) Plato, Sophistes 244ll.

Introductwn, Chapter One
i. (H. 3) AristotIe, Metaphysica B 4, 1001 a 21.
ii. (H. 3) Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica 111 Q. 94 art. 2.
iii. (H. 3) AristotIe, Metaphysù:a B 3, 998 b 22.
iv. (H. 4) Cf. Pascal, Pensées et Opuscules (ed. Brunschvicg),6 Paris, 1912, p. 169; 'On ne
peut entreprendre de définir l'être sans tomber dans cette absurdité: car on ne peut
définir un mot sans commencer par celui-ci, c'est, soit qu'on l'exprime ou qu'on le
GOus-entende. Donc pour définir l'être, il faudrait dire c'est, et ainsi employer le mot
défini dans sa définition.'
v. (H. 6) Plato, Sophistes 242C.
vi. (H. 14) AristotIe, De Anima r 8, 431 b 21 ; cf. ibid. r 5, 430 a 14 ff.
vii. (H. 14) Thomas Aquinas, Quaestwnes de Veritate, q. l, al c; cf. the somewhat different
and in part more rigorous way in which he carries out a 'deduction' of the transcendentia
in his opuscule 'De Natura Generis'.
Introductwn, Chapter Two
i. (H. 23) I. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason,2 pp. 180 f.
ii. (H. 26) AristotIe, Physica J 10-14 (217b 2g-22~ 17).
iii. (H. 26) I. Kant, op. cit., p. 121.
iv. (H. 32) Cf. AristotIe, De Interpretatwne 1-0; aiso Metaphysù:a Z 4, and Ethù:a NicomacheaZ
v. (H. 38) If the following investigation has taken any steps forward in disdosing the
'things themselves', the author must first of aIl thank E. Husserl, who, by providing his
own incisive personal guidance and by freely turning over bis unpublished investigations, farniliarized the author with the most diverse areas of phenomenological research
during his student years in Freiburg.
Division One, Chapter One
i. (H. 44) St. Augustine, Confesswnes, X, 16. ['But what is doser to me than myself?
Assuredly 1 labour here and 1 labour within myself; 1 have become to myself a land oC
trouble and inordinate sweat.'-Tr.]
ii. (H. 47) Edmund Husserl's investigations oC the 'personality' have not as yet been
published. The basic orientation of his problematic is apparent as early as his paper
'Philosophie ais strenge Wissenschaft', Logos, vol. l, 1910, p. 319. His investigation was
carried much further in the second part of his Ideen zu Biner reinen PMrwmenologie
und phiinomenologischen Philosophie (Husserliana IV), of which the first part (CC. this
Jahrbuch [Jahrbuch jür Philosophie und phiinomenologische Forschung-Tr.] vol. l, 1913),
presents the problematic of 'pure consciousness' as the basis for studying the Constitution of any Reality whatsoever. His detailed Constitutionai analyses are to be
found in three sections of the second part, where he treats: 1. the Constitution of
material Nature; 2. the Constitution of animal Nature; 3. the Constitution of the
spiritual worid (the personalistic point ofview as opposed to the naturaIistic). Husserl
begins with the words: 'A1though Dilthey grasped the problems which point the way,
and saw the directions which the work to be done would have to take, he still failed to
penetrate to any decisive formulations of these problems, or to any solutions of them
which are methodologically correct.' Husserl has studied these problems still more
deeply since this first treatrnent of them; essentiai portions of bis work have been
communicated in his Freiburg lectures.

Being and Time

Being and Time

iii. (H. 47) This Jahrbuch, vol. I, 2,1913, and II,1916; cf. especially pp. 242 ff.
iv. (H. 47) Ibid., II, p. 243.
v. (H.47) Cf. Logos l, loc. cit.
vi. (H. 48) Ibid., p. 246.
vii. (H. 48) Genesis l, 26. ['And God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness." '-Tr.]
viii. (H. 49) Calvin, Institutio I, XV, Section 8. ['Man's first condition was excellent
hecause of these outstanding endowments: that reason, intelligence, prudence, judgment should suffice not only for the government of this earthly life, but that by them he
might ascend beyond, even unto God and to eternal felicity.'-Tr.]
ix. (H. 49) Zwingli. Von der Klarheit des Wortes Gottes (Deutsc!14 Schrijten l, 56). ['Because
man looks up to God and bis Word, he indicates clearly that in bis very Nature he is
barn somewhat closer to God, is something more after his starnp, that he has 50mething
that draws him to God-all this comes beyond a doubt from bis having been created in
God's image.'-Tr.]
x. (H. 50) But to disclose the a priori is not ta make an 'a-prioristic' construction. Edmund
Husserl has not only enabled us to understand once more the meaning of any genuine
philosophical empiricism; he has also given us the necessary tooIs. 'A-priorism' is the
method of every scientific philosophy which understands itself. There is nothing
constructivistic about it. But for this very reason a priori research requires that the
phenomenal basis he properly prepared. The horizon which is closest to us, and which
must he made ready for the analytic of Dasein, lies in its average everydayness.
xi. (H. 51) Ernst Cassirer has recentIy made the Dasein of myth a theme for philo5Ophical
Interpretation. (See bis Philosophie der symbolischen Formen, vol. II, Das mythisc!14 Denken,
1925.) ln this study, clues of far-reac1Iing importance are made available for ethnological research. From the standpoint of philosophical problematies it remains an open
question whether the foundations of this Interpretation are sufficientIy transparentwhether in particular the architectonies and the general systematic content of Kant's
Critique of Pure &ason can provide a possible design for such a task, or whether a new
and more primordial approach may not here be needed. That Cassirer himself sees the
possibility of such a task is shown by bis note on pp. 16 ff., where he alludes to the
phenomenological horizons disclosed by Husserl. In a discussion between the author and
Cassirer on the occasion of a lecture before the Hamburg section of the Kantgesellscooft
in December 1923 on 'Tasks and Pathways of Phenomenological Research', it was
already apparent that we agreed in demanding an existential analytic such as was
sketched in that lecture.

490

vii. (H. 91) Ibid., Pr. 65, p. 32. ['... ifwe think ofnothing except what has a place and
do not ask about the force by which it is set in motion .. .'-Tr.]
,
viii. (H. 91) Ibid., II, Pr. 4. p. 42. ['For, 50 far as hardness is concerned, the sense shows
us nothing eIse about it than that portions of hard bodies resist the movement of our
hands when they come up against those portions. For ifwhenever our hands are moved
towards ~ certa,in portion, all the bodies there should retreat with the same velocity
as that wl0 w~l~h our hands ~ppro~ch, we should never feel any hardness. Nor is it in
any way mtelhg.ble that bodies which thus recede should accordingly lose their corporeal nature; hence this does not consist in hardness.'-Tr.]
ix. (H. 91) Ibid. ['And by the same reasoning it can be shown that weight and colour
and all the other qualities of this sort which are sensed in corporeal matter, can be
taken away from it, while that matter remains entire; it follows that the nature of this
<viz. ofextension> depends upon none ofthese.'-Tr.]
x. (H. 92) Ibid., l, pr. 51, p. 24. ['Indeed we perceive that no other things exist without
the help of God's concurrence.'-Tr.]
xi. (H. 92) Ibid. ['••• only one substance which is in need of nothing whatsoever, can be
understood, and this indeed is God.'-Tr.]
xii. (H. 92) Ibid. ['Indeed we perceive that other things cannot exist without the help of
God's concurrence.'-Tr.]
xiii. (H. 93) Ibid. [The complete passage may be translated as follows: 'The name "substance" is not appropriate to God and to these univocalry, as they say in the SchooIs;
that is, no signification of this name which would be common to bath God and his
creation can he distinctIy understood.'-Tr.]
xiv. (H. 93) ln this connection, cf. Opuscula omnia Thomae de Vio Caietani Cardinalis, Lugduni, 1580, Tomus III, Tractatus V; 'de nominum analogia', pp. 211-219.
xv. (H. 93) Descartes, op. cit., l, Pr. 51, p. 24. ['No signification ofthis name< "substance" >
which would he common to God and his creation can be distinctIy understood.'-Tr.]
xvi. (H. 94) Ibid., l, Pr. 52, p. 25. ['Yet substance cannot first be discovered merely by the
fact that it is a thing that exists, for this alone by itself does not affect us.'-Tr.]
xvii. (H.94) Ibid., l, Pr. 63, p. 31. ['Indeed we understand extended substance, or thinking substance more easily than substance alone, disregarding that which thinks or is
extended.'-Tr.]
xviii. (H. 96) Ibid., II, Pr. 3, p. 41. ['It will be enough ifwe point out that the perceptions
of the senses are not referred to anything but the union of the human body with the
mind, and that indeed they ordinarily show us in what way external bodies can be of
help to it or do it harm.'-Tr.]
xix. (H. 97) Ibid., II, Pr. 3, pp. 41-42. ['.•. but they do not teach us what kinds of things
<bodies> exist in themselves.'-Tr.]
xx'. (H. 97) Ibid., II, Pr. 4, p. 42. ['If we do this, we shall perceive that the nature of
matter, or of body as regarded universally, does not consist in its being 50mething hard
or heavy or coloured or affecting the senses in some other way, but only in its being
50mething extended in length, breadth, and thickness.'-Tr.]
xxi. (H. 109) Immanuel Kant: 'Was Heisst: Sich im Denken orientieren?' (1786) Werke
(AkOO. Ausgabe), Vol. VIII, pp. 131-147.
xxii. (H. 112) Cf. O. Becker, Beitriige zur phiinomenologisc!l4n Begründung der Geometrie und
ihrer physikalischen Anwendungen, in this Yearbook [Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phiinomenologisc!14 Forschung], vol. VI (1923), pp. 385 ff.

Division One, Coopter T wo
i. (H. 54) Cf. Jakob Grimm, Kleinere Schrijten, vol. VII, p. 247.
ii. (H. 56) Cf. Section 29.
Division One, Coopter TMee
i. (H. 72) The author may remark that this analysis of the environment and in general
the 'hermeneutic of the facticity' of Dasein, have been presented repeatedly in bis
lectures since the winter semester of 1919--1920.
ii. (H. 77) Cf. E. Husserl, Ideen zu einer reinen Phiinomenologie und phiinomenologischen
Philosophie, I. Teil, this Yearbook [Jahrbuch fÜT Philosophie und Phiinomenologisc!14
Forschung] vol. l, Section 10 ff., as weil as his Logisc!14 Untersuchungen, vol. l, Ch. Il. For
the analysis ofsigns and signification see ibid., vol. II, l, Ch. 1.
iii. (H. 90) Descartes, Principia Philosophiae, l, Pr. 53. (Œuvres, ed. Adam and Tannery,
vol. VIII, p. 25.) ['And though substance is indeed known by some attribute, yet for
each substance there is pre-eminentIy one property which constitutes its nature and
essence, and to which ail the rest are referred.'-Tr.]
iv. (H. 90) Ibid. ['Indeed extension in length, breadth, and thickness constitutes the nature
of corporeal substance.' The emphasis is Heidegger's.-Tr.]
v. (H. 90) Ibid. ['For everything eIse that can be ascribed to body presupposes extension.'
-Tr.]
vi. (H. 90) Ibid., Pr. 64, p. 31. ['And one and the same body can be extended in many
different ways while retaining the same quantity it had before; surely it can sometimes
be greater in length and less in breadth or thickness, while later it may, on the contrary,
he greater in breadth and less in length.'-Tr.]

491

Division One, Chapter Four
i. (H. 116) Cf. what Max Scheler has pointed out phenomenologically in his Zur Phiinomenologie und Theorie der Sympathiegefühle, 1913, Anl1ang, pp. 118 ff.; see also bis second
edition under the tide Wesen und Formen der Sympathie, 1923, pp. 244 ff.
ii. (H. 119) 'über die Verwandtschaft der Ortsadverbien mit dem Pronomen in einigen
Sprachen' (1829), Gesammelte Schriften (published by the Prussian Academy of Sciences),
vol. VI, Part l, pp. 304-330.
Division One, Coopter Five

i. (H. 131) Cf. Section 12, H. 52 ff.

~: (H. 131) Cf. Secti~>n 13, H. 59"-63.
!u. (H. 137) Cf. S~ctIon 18, H. 83 ff.
.
IV. (H. 138) Cf. AristotIe, Metaphyska A 2, 982 b 22 sqq. ['comfort and recreatIon'-Ross].

Being and Time

Being and Time

v. (H. 139) Cf. Pascal, Pensées, [ed. Brunschvicg, Paris, p. 185]. 'Et de là vient qu'au lieu
qu'en parlant des c/wses humaines on dit qu'il faut les connaître avant que de les aimer, ce qui a
passé en proverbe, les saints au contraire disent en parlant des c/wses divines qu'il faut les aimer
pour les connaître, et qu'on n'entre dans la vérité que par la charité, dont ils ont fait une de leurs
plus utiles sentences.' ['And thence it cornes about that in the case where we are speaking
of human things, it is said to be necessary to know them before we love them, and this
has become a proverb; but the saints, on the contrary, when they speak ofdivine things,
say that we must love them before we know them, and that we enter into truth only
by charity; they have made of this one of their most useful maxirns'.-Tr.] Cf. with
this, Augustine, Opera, (Migne Patrologiae Latïnae, tom. VIII), Contra Faustum, lib. 32,
cap. 18: 'non intratur in veritatem, nisi per charitatem.' ['one does not enter into truth except
through charity'.-Tr.]
vi. (H. 140) Cf. Aristotle, Rhetorica B 5, 1382 a 20-1383 b Il.
vii. (H. 143) Cf. Section 18, H. 85 ff.
viii. (H. 147) Cf. Section 4, H. I l ff.
ix. (H. 156) Cf. Section 13, H. 59 ff.
x. (H. 166) On the doctrine of signification, cf. Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen,
vol. Il, Investigations 1, IV-VI. Bee further the more radical version of the problematic
in his Ideen 1, Sections 123 ff., pp. 255 ff.
xi. (H. 171) Aristotle, Metaphysica A 1,980 a 21.
xii. (H. 171) Augustine, Corifessiones, X, 35.
xiii. (H. 175) Cf. Section 9, H. 42 ff.

(H. 201) Cf. H. 89 ff. and H. 100.
ix. (H. 203) Cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason,2 pp. 274 ff., and further the corrections
added in the preface to the second edition, p. xxxix, note: see also 'On the Paralogisrns
of the Pure Reason', ibid., pp. 399 ff., especially p. 412.
x. (H. 203) Ibid., Preface, note.
xi. (H. 203) Ibid., p. 275.
xii. (H. 203) Ibid., p. 275.
xiii. (H. 204) Ibid., p. 275.
xiv. (H. 205) Ibid., Preface, note.
xv. (H. 205) Cf. W. Dilthey, 'Beitriige zur L&ung der Frage vom Ursprung unseres
Glaubens an die Realitiit der Aussenwelt und seinem Recht' (1890), Gesammelte
Schriften, Vol. V, l, pp. 90 ff. At the very beginning of this article Dilthey says in no
uncertain terrns: 'For ifthere is to be a truth which is universally valid for man, then
in accordance with the method first proposed by Descartes, thought must make its
way from the facts of consciousness rather than from external actuality.' (Ibid., p. 90')
xvi. (H. 208) Following Scheler's procedure, Nicolai Hartmann has recently based his
ontologically oriented epistemology upon the thesis that knowing is a 'relationship of
Being'. Cf. his Grundzüge einer Metaphysik der Erkenntnis, second enlarged edition, 1925.
Both Scheler and Hartmann, however, in spite of all the differences in the phenomenological bases from which they start, fail to recognize that in its traditional basic orientation as regards Dasein, 'ontology' has been a failure, and that the very 'relationship of
Being' which knowing includes (see above, H. 59 ff.), compels such 'ontology' to be
revised in its prïncïples, not just critically corrected. Because Hartmann underestimates
the unexpressed consequences ofpositing a relationship-of-Being without providing an
ontological clarification for it, he is forced into a 'critical realism' which is at bottom
quite foreign to the level of the problematic he has expounded. On Hartmann's way of
taking ontology, cf. his 'Wie ist kritische Ontologie überhaupt moglich ?', Festschrift
fÜT Paul Natorp, 1924, pp. 124 ff.
xvii. (H. 209) Cf. especially Section 16, H. 72 ff. ('How the Worldly Character of the
Environment Announces itself in Entities Within-the-world'); Section 18, H. 83 ff.
('Involvement and Si~cance; the Worldhood of the World'); Section 29, H. 134 ff.
('Dasein as State-of-Mind'). On the Being-in-itselfofentities within-the-world, cf. H. 75 f.
xviii. (H. 209) Dilthey, op. cit., p. 134.
xix. (H. 210) Cf. Scheler's lecture, 'Die Formen des Wissens und die Bildung', 1925, notes
24 and 25. In reading our proofs we notice that in the collection of Scheler's treatises
which has just appeared (Die Wissensformen und die Gesellschaft, 1926) he has published
his long-promised study 'Erkenntnis und Arbeit' (pp. 233 ff.). Division VI of this
treatise (p. 455) brings a more detailed exposition ofhis 'voluntative theory of Dasein',
in connection with an evaluation and critique of Dilthey.
xx. (H. 212) Diels, Fragment 5. [This passage may be translated in more than one way:
e.g., 'for thought and being are the same thing' (Fairbanks); 'it is the same thing that
can be thought and that can be' (Burnet).-Tr.]
xxi. (H. 212) Aristotle, Metaphysïca A.
xxii. (H. 213) Ibid., A, 98~ 18 ff. ['..• the very fact showed them the way and joined
in forcing them to investigate the subject.' (Ross)-Tr.]
xxiii. (H. 213) Ibid., A, 986b 31.
xxiv. (H. 213) Ibid., A, 984b 10.
xxv. (H. 213) Ibid., A, 983b 2. Cf. g88a 20.
xxvi. (H. 213) Ibid., a./,993b 17.
xxvii. (H. 213) Ibid., a./, 993b 20.
xxviii. (H. 213) Ibid., ri, I003a 21.
xxix. (H. 214) Aristotle, De interpretatione l, 16a. 6. [This is not an exact quotation.-Tr.]
xxx. (H. 214) Cf. Thomas Aquinas, Quaestiones disputatae de veritate, quo l, art. 1.
xxxi. (H. 215) Kant, Critique of Pure Reason,2 p. 82.
xxxii. (H. 215) Ibid., p. 83. [Two trivial misprints in this quotation which appear in the
earlier editions have been corrected in the later editions.-Tr.]
xxxiii. (H. 215) Ibid., p. 350. [Another trivial misprint has been corrected in the later
editions.-Tr.]
xxxiv. (H. 218) On the idea of demonstration as 'identification' cf. Husserl, Logische
Untersuchungen,2 vol. II, part 2, Untersuchung VI. On 'evidence and truth' see ibid.,
Sections 36-39, pp. 115 ff. The usual presentations of the phenomenological theory

492

Division One, Chapter Six
i. (H. IBo) Cf. Section 12, H. 52 ff.
ii. (H. 188) Cf. Section 12, H. 53 ff.
iii. (H. 189) Cf. Section 27, H. 126 ff.
iv. (H. 190) It is no accident that the phenomena of anxiety and fear, which have never
been distinguished in a thoroughgoing manner, have come within the purview of
Christian theology ontically and even (though within very narrow limits) ontologically.
This has happened whenever the anthropological problem of man's Being towards
God has won priority and when questions have been formulated under the guidance
of phenomena like faith, sin, love, and repentance. Cf. Augustine's doctrine of the timor
castus and servilis, which is discussed in his exegetical writings and his letters. On fear in
general cf. his De diversis quaestionibus octoginta tribus, quo 33 (de metu); quo 34 (utrum non
aliud amandum sit, quam metu came); quo 35 (quid amandum sit). (Migne, Patrologiae Latinae
tom. VII, pp. 23 ff.)
Luther has treated the problem of fear not only in the traditional context of an
Interpretation of poenitentia and contritio, but also in his commentary on the Book of
Genesis, where, though his treatment is by no means highly conceptualized, it is ail the
mo~e impressive as edification. Cf. Enarrationes in genesin, cap. 3, Werke (Erlanger
Ausgabe), Exegetica opera latina, tom. l, pp. 177 ff.
The man who has gone farthest in analysing the phenomenon ofanxiety-and again in
the theological context of a 'psychological' exposition of the problem oforiginal sin-is
Seren Ki~rke~aard. Cf. Der Begriff der Angsl [17le Concept of Dread], 1844, Gesammelte
Werke (Dledenchs), vol. 5.
v. (H. 197) The author ran across the following pre-ontological illustration of the
existential-ontological Interpretation of Dasein as care in K. Burdach's article. 'Faust
und die Sorge' (Deutsche Vierteljahrschrift für Littraturwissenschaft und Geistesgeschichte,
vol. 1, 1923, pp. 1 ff.). Burdach has shown that the fable of Cura (which has come down
to us as No. 220 of the Fables of Hyginus) was taken over from Herder by Goethe and
worked up for the second part of his Faust. Cf. especially pp. 40 ff. The text given
above is taken from F. Bücheler (Rheinisches Museum, vol. 41, 1886, p. 5); the translation
is from Burdach, ibid., pp. 41 ff.
~ (H. 198) Cf. Herder's po,:m: 'Das Kind der Sorge' (Suphan XXIX, 75).
VII. (H.. 199) Burdach, op. Cil., p. 49. Even as earlyas the Stoics, /-,lpl/-,Va. was a firmly
estabhshed term, and it recurs in the New Testament, becoming "sollicitudo" in the
Vulgate. The way in which 'care' is viewed in the foregoing existential analytic of
Dasein, is one which has grown upon the author in connection with his attempts to
Interpret the Augustinian (i.e., Helleno-Christian) anthropology with regard to the
foundational principles reached in the ontology of Aristotle.

VIU.

493

Being and Time

Being and Time

of truth confine themselves to what has been said in the critical prolegomena (vol. 1),
and mention that this is connected with Bolzano's theory of the proposition. But the
positive phenomenological Interpretations, which differ basically from Bolzano's theory,
have been neglected. The only person who has taken up these investigations positively
from outside the main stream of phenomenological research, has been E. Lask, whose
Logik der Philosophie (1911) was as strongly influenced by the sixth Untersuchung (über
sinnliche und kategoriale Anschauungen', pp. 128 ff.) as his Lehre vom Urteü (1912)
was influenced by the above-mentioned sections on evidence and truth.
xxxv. (H. 219) Cf. Diels, Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, Heracleitus fragment BI.
xxxvi. (H. 220) Cf. H. 32 ff.
xxxvii. (H. 221) Cf. H. 134 ff.
xxxviii. (H. 221) Cf. H. 166 ff.
xxxix. (H. 223) Karl Reinhardt (Cf. his Parmenides und die Geschichte der grieschischen
Phüosophie, 1916) was the first to conceptualize and solve the hackneyed problem of
how the two parts of Parmenides' poem are connected, though he did not explicitly
point out the ontological foundation for the connection between .u~8n(l and M~(I,
or its necessity.
xl. (H. 223) Cf. Section 33 above, H. 153 ff. ('Assertion as a derivative mode of interpretation.')
xli. (H. 223) Cf. Section 34, H. 160 ff.
xlii. (H. 225) Cf. Aristotle, Ethica Nicomachea Z and Metaphvsica BIo.

pheno~enon of ~eath. in his c~aracterization of 'li~e', tho~gh admittedly without clearly
separatmg the blOlo.glcal-ontlca~ and th~ ontologlcal-exlStential problematics. (Cf. his
Leb~nsatlfcOOuung: Vier Metaphyslsche.Kapltel, 1918, pp. 99-153.) For the investigation
which !I~ before us, compare espec~ally Karl Jaspers' Psychologie der Weltanschauungen,

494

Division T wo, Section 45
i. (H. 231) Cf. Section 9, H. 41 ff.
ii. (H. 231) Cf. Section 6, H. 19 ff.; Section 21, H. 95 ff.; Section 43, H. 201.
üi. (H. 232) Cf. Section 32, H. 148 ff.
iv. (H. 232) Cf. Section 9, H. 41 ff.
v. (H. 233) Cf. Section 41, H. 191 ff.
vi. (H. 235) In the nineteenth century, S0ren Kierkegaard explicitly seized upon the
problem of existence as an existentiell problem, and thought it through in a penetrating
fashion. But the existential problematic was so alien to him that, as regards his ontology,
he remained completely dominated by Hegel and by ancient philosophy as Hegel saw
it.1 Thus, there is more to be learned philosophieally from his 'edifying' writings than
from his theoretical ones-with the exception of his treatise on the concept of anxiety.
[Here Heidegger is referring to the work generally known in English as The Concept
of Dread.-Tr.]
Division T wo, Chapter One
i. (H. 240) Cf. Section 9, H. 41 ff.
ii. (H. 241) Cf. Section 10, H. 45 ff.
iii. (H. 244) The distinction between a whole and a sum, oÀov and 'lrâv, totum and
compositum, has been familiar since the time of Plato and Aristotle. But admittedly no
one as yet knows anything about the systematics of the categorial variations which this
division already embraces, nor have these been conceptualized. As an approach to a
thorough analysis of the structures in question, cf. Edmund Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, vol. II, Untersuchung III: 'Zur Lehre von den Ganzen und Teilen'.
iv. (H. 245) Der Ackermann aus B ohmen, edited by A. Bernt and K. Burdach. (Vom Mittetalter
zur Reformation. Forschungen zur Geschichte der deutschen Bildung, edited by K. Burdach,
vol. III, 2. Tcü) 1917, chapter 20, p. 46.
v. (H. 246) On this topie, cf. the comprehensive presentation in E. Korschelt'sLebensdauer,
Altern und Tod, 3rd Edition, 1924. Note especially the full bibliography, pp. 414 ff.
vi. (H. 249) In its Interpretation of 'life', the anthropology worked out in Christian
theology-from Paul right up to Calvin's meditatio futurae vitae-has always kept death
in view. Wilhelm Dilthey, whose real philosophical tendencies were aimed at an
ontology of 'life', could not fail to recognize how life is connected with death: '... and
finally, that relationship which most deeply and universally determines the feeling of
our Dasein-the relationship of life to death; for the bounding of our existence by
death is always decisive for our understanding and assessment oflife.' (Das Erlebnis und
die Dichtung, 5th Edition, p. 230.) Recently, G. SÎnlmel has also explicitly included the
1 Here we follow the older editions in reading '. • . und der durch diesen gesehenen
antiken Philosophie •• .' In the new editions 'gesehenen' has been changed to 'geschehenen'.

495

3rd Edition, 1925, pp. 229 ff., especlally pp. 259-270. Jaspers takes as his clue to death
the phenomenon of the 'limit-situation' as he has set it forth-a phenomenon whose
fundamental significance goes beyond any typology of 'attitudes' and 'world-pictures'.
Dilthey's challenges have been taken up by RudolfUnger in his Herder, Novalis und
Kleist. Studien über die Entwicklung des Todesproblems im Denken und Dichten von Sturm und
Drang zur Romantik, 1922. In his lecture 'Literaturgeschichte ais Problemgeschichte.
Zur Frage geisteshistorischer Synthese, mit besonderer Beziehung aufWilhelm Dilthey'
(Schriften der K iinigsberger Gelehrten Gesellschaft, Geisteswissenscooftliche Klasse, 1. Jahr, Heft l,
1924), Unger considers the principles of Dilthey's way of formulating the question. He
sees clearly the significance of phenomenological research for laying the foundations of
the 'problems oflife' in a more radical manner. (Op. cit., pp. 17 ff.)
vii. (H. 249) Cf. Section 41, H. 192.
viii. (H. 251) Cf. Section 40, H. 184 ff.
ix. (H. 252) Cf. Section 27, H. 126 ff.
x. (H. 253) Cf. Section 16, H. 72 ff.
xi. (H. 253) Cf. Section 38, H. 177 ff.
xii. (H. 254) In his story 'The Death of Ivan I1yitch' Leo Toistoi has presented the
phenomenon of the disruption and breakdown of having 'someone die'.
xiii. (H. 255) In connection with this methodological possibility, cf. what was said on the
analysis of anxiety, Section 40, H. 184.
xiv. (H. 256) Cf. Section 44, H. 212 ff., especially H. 219 ff.
xv. (H. 257) Cf. Section 44 b H. 222.
xvi. (H. 259) The inauthenticity of Dasein has been handled in Section 9 (H. 42 ff.),
Section 27 (H. 130), and especially Section 38 (H. 175 ff.).
xvii. (H. 263) Cf. Section 31, H. 142 ff.
xviii. (H. 265) Cf. Section 62, H. 305 if.
xix. (H. 265) Cf. Section 29, H. 134 ff.
xx. (H. 266) Cf. Section 40, H. 184 ff.

Division Two, Coopter Two
i. (H. 267) Cf. Section 25, H. 114 ff.
ii. (H. 267) Cf. Section 27, H. 126 ff., especially H. 130.
iii. (H. 268) These observations and those which follow after were communieated as
theses on the occasion of a public lecture on the concept of time, whieh was given at
Marburg inJuly 1924.
iv. (H. 270) Cf. Section 28 ff., H. 130 ff.
v. (H. 271) Cf. Section 34, H. 160 ff.
vi. (H. 272) Besides the Interpretations of conscience which we find in Kant, Hegel,
Schopenhauer, and Nietzsche, one should notice M. Kiihler's Das Gewissen, erster
geschichtlicher Teil (1878) and his article in the Realen;;yklopiidie für Protestantische Theologie und Kirche. See too A. Ritschl's 'über das Gewissen' (1876), reprinted in his
Gesammelte Aufsiitze, NeueFolge (1896), pp. 177 ff. See finally H. G. Stoker's monograph,
Das Gewissen, which has recently appeared in Schriften zur Philosophie und Soziologie,
vol. II (1925), under the editorship of Max Scheler. This is a wide-ranging investigation; it brings to light a rich multiplicity of conscience-phenomena, characterizes
critically the different possible ways of treating this phenomenon itself, and lists sorne
further literature, though as regards the history of the concept of conscience, this list
is not complete. Stoker's monograph differs from the existential Interpretation we have
given above in its approach and accordingly in its results as weIl, regardless of many
points of agreement. Stoker underestimates from the outset the hermeneutical conditions for a 'description' of 'conscience as something which subsists Objectively and
actually' (p. 3). This leads to blurring the boundaries between phenomenology and
theology, with damage to both. As regards the anthropological foundation of this
investigation, in which the personalism of Scheler has been taken over, cf. Section 10
of the present treatise, H. 47 ff. AIl the same, Stoker's monograph signifies notable
progress as compared with previous Interpretations of conscience, though more by its

Being and Time

Being and Time

comprehensive trea.tment of the conscience-phenomena and their ramifications than by
exhibiting the ontological roots of the phenomenon itself.
vii. (H. 277) Cf. Section 40, H. 189. .
viii. (H. 291) Cf. Max Scheler, Der Formalismus in der Ethik und di4 matmale Wertethik, Part
Two, Jahrbuch fÜ1 phüosophi4 und phiinomologische Forschung, vol. II (19 16), p. 192.
[This passage is found on page 335 of the fourth edition, Francke Verlag, Bern, 1954
-Tr.]
ix. (H. 296) Cf. Section 34, H. 164.
x. (H. 297) Cf. Section 44, H. 212 if.
xi. (H. 297) Cf. ibid., H. 221.
xii. (H. 297) Cf. Section 18, H. 83 if.
xiii. (H. 298) Cf. Section 44b, H. 222.
xiv. (H. 299) Cf. Sections 23 and 24, H. 104 if.
xv. (H. 301) In the direction of such a problematic, Karl Jaspers is the first to have
explicitly grasped the task of a doctrine of world-views and carried it through. Cf. his
Psychologi4 der Weltanschauungen, 3rd edition, 1925. Here the question of'what man is' is
raised and answered in terms ofwhat he essentially can be. (Cf. the foreword to the first
edition.) The basic existential-ontological signification of 'limit-situations' is thus
illumined. One would entirely miss the philosophical import of this 'psychology of
world-views' if one were to 'use' it simply as a reference-work for 'types of world-view'.

Festschrift zur z"'!1,!ten Jahrhunder,tfeier, seine.s Geburtstages, 1924). The line taken in tIre essay
goes beyond gIvmg a mere hlStonologlcal report, and is aimed towards the 'categorial' problem ofpersonality.
Hein:soeth says: 'Too.little note has been ~ken of the intimate way in which the
theor~ucal and ~e pracucal reason ~e worked mto one another in Kant's practice and
plannmg; too httle hc:ed ha;; been gIven to the fact that even here the categories (as
opp~s~ to ~e wa~ m 'Y~lch they are filled i~ naturalistically in the 'principles')
expliCltly retam thelr vahdity and, under the pnmacy of the practical reason are to
find a new application detached from naturalistic rationalism (substance for i~tance
in the 'person' and personal immortality; causality as the 'causality of freedom" and
~eciprocity in ~e 'community of rational creatures'; and so forth). They se~e as
mtellectual fixatiVes for a new way of access to the unconditioned without seeking to
give any ratiocinative kno~ledge ofit as an object.' (pp. 31 f.)
,
Bu~ here the real ontologlcal problem has been passed over. We cannot leave aside the
quesuon of wh~th~r these 'categories' can retain their primordial validity and only
need to be.apphed m ~nother way, or whether they d:0 not rather pervert the ontological
problemaucs of Dasem from the ground up. Even If the theoretical reason has been
built into the practical, the existential-ontological problem of the Self remains not
~erely unsolved;,it has not even.been raised. On w~at ontological basis is the 'working
mto on.e another o! the theor.eucal and the p~actlcal reason to be performed? ls it
theoreucal or pracucal behavlOur that determmes the kind of Being of a person or
neither of them-and if neither, then what is it? In spite of their fundamental si~ifi­
cance, do .not the paralogisms make manifest how ontologically groundless are the
problemaucs of the Self from Descartes' Tes cogitans right up to Hegel's concept of spirit ?
One does not need to .~k either 'naturalistically' or 'rationalistically', and yet one
may be under the dommatlOn of the ontology of the 'substantial'-a domination which
is only more baleful because it is seemingly self-evident.
See wh~t is essenti~lly l!' supplement. to the above-~c:ntioned essay: Heimsoeth, 'Die
metaphyslschen Mouve m der Ausbildung des Krluschen ldealismus' Kantstudi4n
XXIX, (1924), pp..121 if. For a critique of Kant's conception of the ''l'','see also M~
Scheler, Der FormallST1lus in der Ethik und di4 materiau Wertethik Part Two in this Yearbook
[Jahrbuchfür Philosophi4 undphiinomenologische Forschung] vol. Ii, 1916, pp: 246 if. ('Person
und das "Ich" der transzendentalen Apperzeption'). [This section is to be found on
pp. 384 if. ofthe fourth edition ofScheler's work, Bern, 1954.-Tr.]
xx. (H. 321) Cf. our phenomenological critique of Kant's 'Refutation of Idealism'.
Section 43a, H. 202 if.
.
xxi. (H. 321) Cf. Sections 12 and 13, H. 52 if.
xxii. (H. 324) Cf. Section 32, H. 148 if., especially H. 151 f.
xxiii. (H. 327) Cf. Section 41, H. 196.
xxiv. (H. 332) Cf. Section 9, H. 43.
xxv. (H. 332) Cf. Sections 25 if., H. 113 if.

496

Division T wo, Chapter Three
i. (H. 302) Cf. Section 58, H. 280 if. [This reference, which appears in both earlier and
later editions seems to be incorrect. Cf. Section 53, H. 260 if.-Tr.]
ii. (H. 306) The Being-guilty which belongs primordially to Dasein's state ofBeing, must
be distinguished from the status corruptionis as understood in theology. Theology can
find in Being-guilty, as existentially defined, an ontological condition for the factical
possibility of such a status. The guilt which is induded in the idea of this status, is
a factical indebtedness of an utterly peculiar kind. It has its own attestation, which
remains dosed oif in principle from any philosophical experience. The existential
analysis ofBeing-guilty, proves nothing eitherfor or against the possibility ofsin. Taken
strictly, it cannot even be said that the ontology of Dasein of itseif leaves this possibility
open; for this ontology, as a philosophical inquiry, 'knows' in prin-ciple nothing about
sin.
iii. (H. 309) Cf. Section 45, H. 231 if.
iv. (H. 310) Cf. Section 45, H. 232.
v. (H. 311) Cr. Section 5, H. 15.
vi. (H. 314) Cf. Section 43, H. 200 if.
vii. (H. 314) Cf. H. 212 and H. 117.
viii. (H. 314) Cf. Section 32, H. 152 If.
ix. (H. 316) Cf. Section 44b, H. 219 If.
x. (H. 317) Cf. Section 41, H. 191 if.
xi. (H. 317) Cf. Section 45, H. 231 if.
xii. (H. 318) Cf. Section 25, H. 114 if.
xiii. (H. 318) Cf. Section 43c, H. 211.
xiv. (H. 318) Cf. Section 41, H. 193.
xv. (H. 318) Cf. Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, second edition, p. 399; and especially the
treatment in the first edition, pp. 348 if.
xvi. (H. 319) On the analysis of transcendental apperception, one may now consult
Martin Heidegger, Kant und das Problem der Metaphysik (zweite unveranderte Auflage,
1951), Division III. [This note replaces the following note in the earlier editions,
referring to a portion of Being and Time which has never appeared: 'The first division of
the second part of this treatise will bring the concrete phenomenologico-critical analysis
of transcendental apperception and its ontological signification.'-Tr.]
xvii. (H. 319) Kant, op. cit., second edition, p. 404.
xviii. (H. 319) Kant, op. cit., first edition p. 354.
xix. (H. 320) The fact that in taking the ontological character of the personal Self as
something 'substantial'; Kant has still kept basically within the horizon of the inappropriate ontology of what is present-at-hand within-the-world, becomes plain from the
material which H. Heimsoeth has worked over in his essay 'Personlichkeitsbewusstsein
und Ding an sich in der Kantischen Philosophie' (reprinted from lmmanuel Kant.

497

Division T wo, Chapeer Four
i. (H. 334) Cf. Division One, H. 41-230.
ii. (H. 336) Cf. Section 31, H. 142 if.
iii. (H. 338) S. Kierkegaard is probably the one who has seen the existenti4ll phenomenon
of the moment of vision with the most penetration; but this does not signify that he has
been correspondingly successful in Interpreting it existentially. He dings to the ordinary
conception of time, and defines the "moment of vision" with the help of "now" and
"eternity". When Kierkegaard speaks of'temporality', what he has in mind is man's
'Being-in-time' ["In-der-Zeit-sein"]. Time as within-time-ness knows only the "now";
it never knows a moment of vision. If, however, such a moment gets experienced in an
existentiell manner, then a more primordial temporality has been presupposed, although existentially it has not been made explicit. On the 'moment of vision', cf.
K. Jaspers, Psychologi4 der Weltanschauungen, third unaltered edition, 1925, pp. 108 if.,
and further his 'review of Kierkegaard' (ibid., pp. 419-432).
iv. (H. 339) Cf. Section 29, H. 134 if.
v. (H. 341) Cf. Section 30, H. 140 if.
vi. (H. 342) Cf. Aristotle, Rhetorica B 5, 1382a 21.
vii. (H. 342) Cf. Section 40, H. 184 if.
viii. (H. 346) Cf. Section 38, H. 175 if.

Being and Time

Being and Time

ix. (H.346) Cf. Sections 35 ff., H. 167 ff.
x. (H. 346) Cf. Section 36, H. 170 ff.
xi. (H. 349) Cf. Section 34, H. 160 ff.
xii. (H. 349) Cf., among others, Jakob Wackernage1, Vorlesungen über Syntax, vol. l, 19 20 ,
p. 15, and especially pp. 149-210. See further G. Herbig, 'Aktionsart und Zeitstufe' in
Indogmrumisch4Forschung, vol. VI, 1896, pp. 167 ff.
xiii. (H. 349) Cf. Division Three, Chapter II of this treatise. [Since Division Three has
never been published, this footnote has been de1eted in the later editions.-Tr.]
xiv. (H.350) Cf. Section 28, H. 133.
xv. (H. 352) Cf. Section 15, H. 66 ff.
xvi. (H. 352) Cf. Section 12, H. 56 ff.
xvii. (H. 353) Cf. Section 18, H. 83 ff.
xviii. (H. 354) Cf. Section 16, H. 72 ff.
xix. (H. 357) Cf. Section 44, H. 212 ff.
xx. (H. 357) Cf. Section 7, H. 27 ff.
xxi. (H. 358) Kant, Critique of Pure Reason, second edition p. 33·
xxii. (H.360) Cf. Section 32, H. 151.
xxiü. (H. 363) The thesis that all cognition has 'intuition' as its goal, has the temp~ral
meaning that all cognizing is making present. Whether every science, or even phl1osophica1 cognition, aims at a making-present, need not be decided here.
Husserl uses the expression 'make present' in characterizing sensory perception. Cf.
his Logiseh6 UntersU&hungen, first edition, 1901, vol. II, pp. 588 and 620. This 'temp?ral'
way of describing this phenomenon must have been suggested by the analysis of
perception and intuition in general in terms of the idea of intention. That the intenti~n­
ality of 'conscfousness' is gro~nt!ed in [Italics, in newer ed~tions only.-;-Tr.] ~,e ,ecstatl~l
unity of Dasem, and how thlS IS the case, wl1l be shown m the followmg DIVISion. [ThIS
Division has never been published.-Tr.]
xxiv. (H. 361-) Cf. Section 18, H. 87 ff.
xxv. (H. 367) Cf. Sections 22-24, H. 101 ff.
xxvi. (H. 370) Cf. Section 9, H. 42 ff.

iii. (H. 414) Cf. Section 18, H. 83 ff., and Section 69c, H. 364 ff.
iv. (H. 417) Here we shall not go into the problem of the measurement of time as treated in
the theory of re1ativity. If the ontological foundations of such measurement are to be
c1arified, this presupposes that world-time and within-time-ness have already been
c1arified in terms of Dasein's temporality, and that light has also been cast on the
existential-temporal Constitution of the discovery of Nature and the temporal meaning
of measurement. Any axiomatic for the physical technique ofmeasurement must rest
upan such investigations, and can never, for its own part, tackle the problem of time
as such.
v. (H. 418) As a first attempt at the Interpretation of chronological time and 'historical
numeration' ["Geschichtszahl"], cf. the author's habilitation-lecture at Freiburg in the
summer semester of 1915: 'Der Zeitbegriffin der Geschichtswissenschaft' (published in
Zeitschriftfür Philosophie und Philosophische Kritik, vol. 161, 1916, pp. 173 ff.) The connections between historical numeration, world-time as calculated astronomically, and
the temporality and historicality of Dasein need a more extensive investigation.
Cf. further G. Simmel, 'Das Problem der historischen Zeit' in Philosophische Vortriige,
verOjfentlicht von der Kantgesellschaft, No. 12, 1916. The two works which laid the basis for
the development of historiological chronology are Josephus Justus Scaliger, De emendatione temporum (1583) and Dionysius Petavius, S. J., Opus de doctrina temporum (1627).
On time-reckoning in antiquity cf. G. Bilfinger, Die antiken Stundenangaben (1888) and
Der bürgerlich4 Tag. Untersuchungen über den Beginn des Kalendertages im klassischen Altertum
und in der christlichen Mittelalter (1888). See also H. Diels, Antike Technik, second edition,
1920, pp. 155-232: 'Die antike Vhr'. More recent chronology is handled by Fr.
Rühl in his Chronologie des Mittelalters und der Neuzeit (1897).
vi. (H. 420) Cf. Section 44', H. 226 ff.
vii. (H. 421) Cf. Aristotle, Physica.d Il, 219b 1 ff.
viii. (H. 421) Cf. Section 6, H. 19-27.
ix. (H. 423) Cf. Section 21, especially H. 100 f.
x. (H. 423) Cf. Plato, Timaeus 37 d. ['But he decided to make a kind ofmoving image of
the eternal; and while setting the heaven in order, he made an eternal image, moving
according to number-an image of that eternity which abides in oneness. It is to this
image that we have given the name of "time".'-Tr.]
xi. (H. 424) Cf. Section 41, H. 191 ff.
xii. (H. 424) Cf. Section 51, H. 252 ff.
xiii. (H. 427) The fact that the traditional conception of "eternity" as signifying the
"standing "now" , (nunc stans), has been drawn from the ordinary way of understanding
time and has been defined with an orientation towards the idea of 'constant' presenceat-hand, does not need to be discussed in detail. If God's eternity can be 'construed'
philosophical1y, then it may be understood only as a more primordial temporality
which is 'infinite'. Whether the way afforded by the via negationis et eminentiae is a
possible one, remains to be seen.
xiv. (H. 427) Aristotle, Physica.d 14,223 a 25; cf. ibid., Il,218 b 2g--219 a l, 219 a 4-6.
['But if nothing other than the soul or the soul's mind were naturally equipped for
numbering, then ifthere were no soul, time would be impossible.'-Tr.]
xv. (H. 427) Augustine, Confessiones XI, 26. ['Hence it seemed to me that time is nothing
else than an extendedness; but ofwhat sort ofthing it is an extendedness, 1 do not know;
and it would be surprising ifit were not an extendedness of the soul itself.'-Tr.]
xvi. (H. 427) On the other hand, the extent to which an even more radical understanding
of time than Hegel's makes itself evident in Kant, will be shown in the first division of
the second part of this treatise. [This portion of the work has not been published.-Tr.]
xvii. (H. 428) Hegel, Die Vernunft in der Geschichte. Einleitung in die Philosophie der Weltgeschichte (00. G. Lasson, 1917), p. 133·
xviii. (H. 428) Hegel, loc. cit.' [This phrase ('das unsinnliche Sinnliche') does not occur in
this section of Hegel's work as presented in Lasson's 1920 edition, though we do find:
'Die Zeit ist dies ganz Abstrakte, Sinnliches.' And in the addendum to Section 254 of
Hegel's Encyclopedia, which Heidegger cites in the fol1owing note, we read that space is
'eine unsinnliche Sinnlichkeit, und eine sinnliche Vnsinnlichkeit'.-Tr.]
xix. (H. 429) Cf. Hegel, Encyklopiklie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse (ed. G.
Bolland, Leiden, 1906), Sections 254 ff. This OOition also includes the 'addenda' from
Hegel's lectures.
xx. (H. 429) Op. cit., Section 257, addendum.

49 8

Division Two, Chapter Five
i. (H. 375) Cf. Section 64, H. 316 ff.
iL (H. 375) Cf. Section 63, H. 310 ff.
iii. (H. 377) Cf. Section 80, H. 411 ff.
iv. (H. 382) Cf. Section 60, H. 295 ff.
v. (H. 382) Cf. Section 62, H. 305 ff.
vi. (H. 383) Cf. H. 284.
,
.,
.
vii. (H. 384) Cf. Section 26, H. 117 f f . ,
viii. (H. 385) On the concept of the 'generatlon', cf. Wl1helm Dilthey, Ober das Studium
der Geschichte der Wissenschaften vom Menschen, der Gesellschaft und dem Staat'
(1875)' GesammelteSchriften, vol. V (1924), pp. 36-41.
ix. (H. 388) On the question of how 'natural happening' is to be distinguished onto10gica1ly from the movement ofhistory, cf. the studies ofF. Gottl, which for a long time
have not been sufficiently appreciated: Die Grenzen der Geschichte (1904)'
x. (H. 392) Cf. Section 6, ~. 1,9 ff.
,
"
.
xi. (H. 394) On the Constitution of hlstoflologlcal understandmg, cf. Eduard Spranger,
'Zur Theorie des Verstehens und zur geisteswissenschaftlichen Psychologie', Festschrift
für Johannes Volkelt, 1918, pp. 357 ff.
xii. (H. 397) Cf. Briefwechsel zwischen Wilhelm Dilthey und dem Grafen Paul rorck von Wartenburg r877-r897, Halle-an-der-Saale, 1923.
xiii. (H. 398) Briefwechsel, p. 185.
xiv. (H. 399) We can forgo this ail the more because we are indebted to G. Misch for a
concrete presentation of Dilthey which is aimed at his central tendencies, and which
is indispensable for coming to terms with Dilthey's work. Cf. his introduction to Wilhelm
Dilthey, Gesammelte Schriften, vol. V (1924), pp. vii-cxvii.
xv. (H.403) Cf. Sections 5 and 6, H. 15 ff.
Division T wo, Chapter Six
i. (H. 408) Cf. Section 33, H. 154 ff.
ii. (H. 413) Cf. Section 15, H. 66 ff.

499

Being and Time

Being and Time

xxi. (H. 429) Ibid., Section 254. [Here Heidegger has again somewhat rearranged Hegel's
words.-Tr.]
xxii. (H. 429) Ibid., Section 254, addendum. [The passage reads as follows: 'Space is thus
punctuality, but a punctuality which is null-eomplete Continuity.'-Tr.]
xxiii. (H. 430) Cf. Hegel, Encyklopadie, Hoffmeister's critical edition, 1949, Section 257.
[In the later editions Heidegger quotes this passage as follows: 'Die Negativitiit, die
sich ais Punkt auf den Raum bezieht und in ihm ihre Bestimmungen ais Linie und
Flache entwickelt, ist aber in der Sphare des Aussersichseins ebensowohlfÜT sùh und
ihre Bestimmungen darin, aber zugleich ais in der Sphare des Aussersichseins setzend,
dabei ais gleichgü1tig gegen das ruhige Nebeneinander erscheinend. Sa fUr sich gesetzt,
ist sie die Zeit.' This version differs somewhat from that given in the earlier editions of
Heidegger's work, in which this footnote does not include the reference ta Hoffmeister's
edition of the Eru:yclopedia. Neither version entirely matches those found in the earlier
editions of Hegel, and similar discrepancies are found in Heidegger's other quotations
from the Eru:yclopedia.-Tr.]
xxiv. (H. 430) Ibid., Section 258.
xxv. (H. 431) Cf. Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, Book l, Division l, chapter 1 (ed. G. Lasson, 1923), pp. 66 ff.
xxvi. (H. 431) Cf. Hegel, Eru:yklopiidie, Section 258, addendum.
xxvii. (H. 431) Ibid., Section 259. [' "übrigens kommt es in der Natur, wo die ZeitJetzt
ist, nicht zum 'bestehenden' Unterschiede vonjenen Dimensionen" (Vergangenheit und
Zukunft).' The quotation appears in a considerably less accurate form in the earlier
editions of Heidegger's work.-Tr.]
xxviii. (H. 431) Ibid., Section 259, addendum.
xxix. (H. 431) Ibid., Section 258, addendum. [The passage from Hegel reads as follows:
'Time is not, as it were, a receptacle in which everything has been put in a stream, and
from which it gets swept away and swept under. Time is only this abstraction of such
cor.suming.' -Tr.]
xxx. (H. 432-433) The priority which Hegel has given to the "now" which has been
levelled off, makes it plain that in defining the concept of time he is under the sway of
the manner in which time is ordinarily understood; and this means that he is likewise
under the sway of the traditional conception of it. It can even be shown that his conception of time has been drawn directly from the 'physics' of Aristode.
ln the Jena Logù (Cf. G. Lasson's 1923 edition), which was projected at the time of
Hegel's habilitation, the analysis of time which we find in his Eru:yclopedia has already
been developed in aIl its essential parts. Even the roughest examination reveals that the
section on time (pp. 202 ff.) is a paraphrase of Aristotle's essay on time. In the Jena Logù
Hegel has already developed his view of time within the framework ofhis philosophy of
Nature (p. 186), the first part of which is entitled 'System of the Sun' (p. 195). Hegel
discusses the concept of time in conjunction with defining the concepts of aether and
motion. Here too his analysis ofspace cornes later. Though the dialectic aiready emerges,
it does not have as yet the rigid schematic form which it will have afterward, but still
makes it possible to understand the phenomena in a fairly relaxed manner. On the way
from Kant to Hegel's developed system, the impact of the Aristotelian ontology and
logic has again been decisive. The Fact of this impact has long been weIl known. But
the kind of effect it has had, the path it has taken, even its limitations, have hitherto
been as obscure as the Fact itselfhas been familiar. A coru:rete philosophùal Interpretation
comparing Hegel's Jena Logù with the 'physics' and 'metaphysics' of Aristode will
bring new light. For the above considerations, sorne rough suggestions will suffice.
Aristotle sees the essence of time in the vûv, Hegel in the "now". Aristotle takes the
vûv as opos; Hegel takes the "now" as a 'boundary'. Aristotle understands the vûv
as UT'YI"~; Hegel interprets the "now" as a point. Aristode describes the vûv as Toll~ T';
Hegel caUs the "now" the 'absolute this' Aristotle follows tradition in connecting
Xpovos with the u4>a'ipa; Hegel stresses the 'circular course' of time. To be sure, Hegel
escapes the central tendency of the Aristotelian analysis-the tendency ta expose a
foundational connection (àKoÀov6.'iv) between the vûv, the opos, the U'TLYf'~' and the
Toll. T'.
ln its results, Bergson's view is in accord with Hegel's thesis that space 'is' time, in
spite of the very different reasons they have given. Bergson merely says the reverse: that
time (temps) is space. Bergson's view of time too has obviously arisen from an Interpretation of the Ari<totelian essay on time. That a treatise of Bergson with the tide

Qpid Aristoteles de loco senserit should have appeared at the same time as his Essai sur les
donnl,es immédiates de. la c?nscieru:e, where .the prob~em of temps and 1urée is expounded, is
not Just a superficlal hterary connectlOn. Havmg regard to Arlstotle's definition of
cime as the ~p.6I"os KW~U~WS, Bergson prefaces his analysis of time with an analysis
of. numbe;. Tlme. as space .(Cf. Es,sai, p. 6g~ is quantitativ.e Succession. By a counteronc:n~ation to this conception of time, duratlOn gets descnbed as qualitative Succession.
~hl5 15 n~t the place [Ort] for c.oming .to terms critically with Bergson's conception of
time or Wlth other Present-day V1ews oflt. So far as anything essential has been achieved
in to-day'.s an~lyses which will take ,us beyond Aristotle and Kant, it pertains more to
the way time lS grasped and to our consclOusness of time'. We shall come back to this
in the first and third divisions of Part Two. [The preceding sentence has been deleted
in the later editions.-Tr.]
ln S?ggesting a direct co.nnection between Hegel's conception of time and Aristotle's
analY~l5, we are not accusmg Hegel of any 'dependence' on Aristotle, but are calling
attention !o the ontologùal import whùh this filiation has in priru:iple for the Begelian logÜ;.
On 'Aristotle and Hegel', cf. Nicolai Hartmann's paper with this tide in Beitriige
z;ur Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus, vol. 3, 1923, pp. 1-36.
~: (H. 433) Cf..Hegel, Wissenschaft der Logik, vol. II (ed. Lasson, 1923)' Part 2, p. 220.
XXXl1. (H. 434) Ibid.
xxxiii. (H. 434) Cf. Hegel, Die Vernunft in der Geschùhte. Einleitung in die Philosophie der
Weltgeschùhte (ed. G. Lasson, 1917), p. 130.
xxxiv. (H. 434) Ibid., p. 132.
xxxv. (H. 434) Ibid.
xxxvi. (H. 434) Ibid.
xxxvii. (H. 434) Cf. Hegel, Phiinomenologie des Geistes, Werke vol. II, p. 604. [In italicizing
the word 'time', we have followed Heidegger's earlier editions and the principal
editi?ns ~~He.gel's w,?~ks; these it~lics are not found in the later editions of Sein und Zeit.
The 1tallclZation of 15 has been mtroducedby Heidegger, and does not appear in the
edition of Hegel which he has apparently used.-Tr.]
xx:xyiü. (H.434) Cf. Hegel, Die Vernunft in der Geschùhte, p. 134.
XXXIX. (H. 435) Cf. Hegel, Eru:yklopadie, Section 25 8 .
xl. (H. 435) Cf. Hegel, Phiinomenologie des Geistes, p. 605,
xli. (H. 436) Cf. Section 7. H. 38.

500

501

NOTE ON THE INDEX AND GLOSSAR y
Being and Time is a work of many interwoven themes, where words are used in
strange ways made stranger still by the shift to another language. The reader must
constantly remind himself of how specifie expressions are used, and he must recaU
the contexts in which they have appeared before. In our index of English expressions we have tried to list most of those which he may have occasion to look up,
indicating which German expressions they have been used to translate and the
chief passages in which they appear. We have also provided a German-English
glossary for the benefit of the reader who needs a translation as an aid in studying
the German text, or who has read other works of Heidegger or discussions of his
theories and wants to know how we have handled specifie problems. We have
taken the reader into our confidence, as it were, exposing not only the pedantic
consistency with which many expressions have been treated but also our many
departures from consistency when a little more pedantry might have been
warranted.
Rather than overloading the index and glossary with trivial detaiIs, we have
made no effort to list aIl the important expressions which belong to the same
famiIy, but have usuaIly chosen one or two to serve as representatives for the rest.
We have, however, used the expression 'But if.' to introduce members of the family
which have been handled in ways other than those which our main entry suggests;
we have done so even in sorne cases where these exceptions are quite trivial.
In both the index and the glossary we have usuaIly tried to list aU the 'equivalents for expressions of each family for which an entry is made. In those cases
where our list is incomplete, we have usuaUy indicated this byan 'etc.'; and we
can assure the reader that most of the expressions covered by this abbreviation are
of little philosophical importance. In the index, an asterisk (.) attached to a
German expression means that to the best of our knowledge this expression has
a/ways been translated by sorne member of the family for which the entry is made.
Similarly, in the glossary we have used asterisks to indicate those English expressions
which (again to the best of our knowledge) have been used solely to translate the
corresponding German expression and its cognates. When several 'equivalents'
are listed, we have put the more frequent ones first. If a word not marked with an
asterisk is given as an 'equivalent' for an expression listed in the glossary, but is not
itself listed in the index (or vice versa), we have sometimes indicated in parentheses
the other expressions to which it corresponds.
When an English expression has been used to translate several German words
ofwhich only one or two are ofphilosophical interest, we have often confined our
index references explicitly to these. When two or more English expressions have
been used to translate the same German word, we have sometimes found it
convenient to put aIl the references together under a single entry. See, for example,
our entries for 'assign' and 'refer'.
In the index we have usually made no attempt to indicate aU the passages in
which an expression occurs. Indeed there are several expressions of the utmost
importance, occurring nearly on every page, for which we have been content to

Being and Time
list only a few key passages or evennone at aIl. When, however, we have sorne
reason to suppose that our list is complete, we have indicated this with a dagger
(t). In general, the less frequently a word appears, the fuller our coverage.
In both the index and the glossary'we,have used the abbreviation 'fin.' to indicate the pages on which our reIevant·footnotes are to he found. In the index we
have sometimes used the abbreviation'iif.'to designate the chief passages in which
the author has discussed the meaning of an expression, if these do not coincide with
those in which it first appears; we havedone so even in sorne cases where the
author would probably not feel thathehas given a full or official 'definition'.
The fullness and accuracy of both index and glossary are due in large measure
to the extensive and careful records prepared by Miss Marjorie Ward. She is not
responsible, however, for any errors we have made in supplementing her records
or reducing them to a more compact form.
AlI references are to the pagination of the later German editions as indicated in
our margins.

GLOSSARY OF GERMAN EXPRESSIONS
abblenden: *dim down
Abgeschlossenheit: (See abschliessen.)
Abgrund: *abyss
(fin. H. 152)
abkünftig: derivative
(ftn. H. 329)
ableben: *demise
(fin. H. 247)
abschliessen, Abschluss: *settle; conclude (H. 184, 259)
Abstand: distance
abstandmiissig, Abstandigkeit: *distantial, *distantiality
Absturz: *downward plunge
abtraglich: *detrimental
Abwesenheit:
absence
(Fehlen;
Mangel, H. 9; etc.)
Aktionsart: aspect
allmglich,
AIltaglichkeit;
Alltag:
*everyday, *everydayness
But if. aIle Tage (every day, H. 370)
(ftn. H. 16)
an: at; to; etc.
(ftn. H. 54)
Analyse: analysis, analyse
Analytik: *analytic
der Andere: the Other, etc.
Angahe, angeben: assign; tell (erzahlen,
Aufschluss geben, sagen, Anweisung, etc.); cite (anführen); etc.
(ftn. H. 408)
matter
Anganglichkeit,
angehen:
(verb); be feasible (*tunlich, H.
337)
angleichen: *liken; *assimilate
(fin. H. 214)
Angst: *anxiety; dread (H. 190 n. iv)
(ftn. H. 182, 277)
anhalten: persist (H. 134); persevere
(H·354)
But if. Anhalt (support, foothold);
ansichhalten (hold itself in, H.
75, 80)
(fin. H. 354)
ankommen, ankünftig: *come along,
*come on, *oncoming; etc.
But if. Ankunft (*arrival, H. 250)
Anruf, anrufen: appeal
(ftn. H. 269, 273)

Ansatz, ansetzen: *approach; regard;
start; posit; etc.
anschauen.
Anschauung:
behold
(schauen, H. 37, 169); intuit,
intuition
(fin. H. 27, 402)
anschneiden: *take the first cut
(fin. H. 150)
ansichhalten: hold itself in
But if. entryfor 'anhalten' above.
(fin. H. 75)
An-sich-sein: Being-in-itself, Being-inthemselves (An-ihm-selbst-sein, H.
90 )
(fin. H. 75)
ansprechen: address; consider
(fin. H. 37, 408)
Anthropologie: *anthropology
(ftn. H. 17)
anvisieren: *set our sights
anweisen, angewiesen, Angewiesenheit:
submit, submission; *enjoin, *injunction; aIlot; assign; dependent
(*abhlingig; etc.); *instruct, *instruction; tell (H. 19, 43, 115);
provide (H. 19)
(fin. H. 68, 87)
anwesend: *having presence
But if. Anwesenheit (presence).
(fin. H. 326)
Anwesenheit: presence
But if. anwesend (*having presence).
(fin. H. 25, 326)
anzeigen, Anzeige: indicate; calI attention
(fin. H. 77)
apophantisch: *apophantical
artikulieren: *Articulate
(ftn. H. 153)
asthetisch: *aesthetic
auf: to; for; etc.
(ftn. H. 84, 329)
aufdecken: uncover; expose (freilegen,
H. 375; sich aussetzen, H. 376)
aufdringlich: *obtrusive
(fin. H. 74)
Aufenthalt: dwelling; sojourn (H. 24);
*stop for a while H. 303)
(fin. H. 61)

506

Being and Time

auffallig, auffallend: *conspicuous
(fin. H. 74)
aufgehen: *be absorbed; rise (H. 412)
(ftn. H. 54)
aufhalten: dwell; hold up (vorhalten,
H. 266)
(ftn. H. 61, 354)
aufrufen, Aufruf: *summon
(fin. H. 269, 273)
Aufsassigkeit: *obstinacy
(ftn. H. 74)
aufscWiessen: *lay open
But cf. Aufschluss (information; tell;
etc.)
(fin. H. 75)
das "Auf-sich-zu": *the 'towardsoneself'
(ftn. H. 329)
sich aufspreizen: *give itself airs
(fin. H. 430)
aufweisen: exhibit; point out; point to
(ftn. H. 53)
aufzeigen: point out; exhibit; point to
(H. 71); *point at (H. 215)
Augenblick: moment; *moment of
vision
(fin. H. 328, 338)
ausdrücken, Ausdruck: express, expression
But cf. ausdrücklich (explicit; etc.)
(fin. H. 149)
ausdrücklich: explicit
But cf. unausdrücklich (tacit, unexpressed, not explicit, etc.)
(ftn. H. 149)
auseinanderlegen: analyse; take apart
(ftn. H. 149)
ausgleichen: balance off; *even out
(H. 126)
auslegen: *interpret; lay out (H. 409)
(ftn. H. l, 148, 149, 409)
ausliefern: *surrender
ausrichten, ausgerichtet: direct, *directional, *directionality; contribute (H. 82)
(fin. H. 102)
(Note: while 'Ausrichtung' is translated
as 'directwnality', 'Ausgerichtetheit'
is translated as *'directedness' .)
ausrücken: *back away
(fin. H. 339)
*ausrufen: proc1aim
aussagen, Aussage: *assert, *assertion;
*deposition (H. 197)

But cf. Aussagesatz (statement);
Heraussage (*speaking forth).
(ftn. H. 62, 149)
Aussein auf •.. : *Being out for ..
*Being out to get ... (H. 261)
a usserlich: *superficial; external
(ftn. H. 339)
das Ausser-sich: *the "outside-of-itself"
Aussersichsein: *Being-outside-of-itself
aussprechen: express; *speak out (H.
1 68f)
But cf. unausgesprochen (tacit; unexpressed);
Ausspruch
(pronouncement; etc.); Aussprache
(pronouncing; etc.).
(fin. H. 149, 167, 224, 408)
Ausstand, ausstehen: *outstanding;
has yet to be given (H. 205, 230)
(ftn. H. 236, 250)
ausweisen: demonstrate
(fin. H. 53)

bedeuten, Bedeutung, Bedeutsamkeit:
*signify, signification, *significance
(fin. H. 1, 87)
(Note; 'Bedeutsamkeit' has always been
translated as 'signijicance', which,
however, has also been used occasionally
for 'Bedeutung'.)
bedrohen: threaten
befinden, befindlich, Befindlichkeit:
*state-of-mind; to be found; find
But cf. Befund (findings; datum,
H. 53; find)
(ftn. 134, 137,328)
(Note: 'Befindlichkeit' has always been
translated as 'state-oJ-mind', which
has also been used occaswnally for
'befinden' and 'befindlich'.)
befragen: *interrogate
befreien: *liberate
befürchten: *be apprehensive
But cf. Furcht, fürchten (*fear); sich
fürchten (*be afraid).
begegnen: *encounter
(ftn. H. 31,44, 329)
(Note; white 'Begegnisart' is translated
as 'way of encountering', 'Begegnis' is
translated as 'mishap' in H. 252.)
begreifen, Begriff: BegrifHichkeit: *conceive, . *concept, *conception,
*conceptual; inc1ude; etc.
But cf. Inbegriff (aggregate).
(ftn. H. 150,433)

Glossary of German Expressions
behalten: retain, *retention, *retentive; keep (H. 132)
But cf. Recht behalten (is right, is
justified); vorbehalten (reserve)
(ftn. H. 354)
bei: *alongside; in; in spite of; etc.
(ftn. H. 54, 84, 85, 141, 239, 329)
belegen: reserve (H. 368), *pre-empt
(H. 19); evidence (H. 431)
(ftn. H. 368)
benommen: *fascinated
But cf. benehmen (take away;
deprive).
(fin. H. 344)
berechnen: calculate
bereden: *talk about
But cf. Rede (*discourse, talk)
berufen: *invoke; appeal (H. 150)
But cf. Beruf (*occupation).
beruhigen: *tranquillize; tranquillity
(Ruhe, H. 254,430)
berühren: touch
besagen: mean; say; amount to; be
tantamount to
(fin. H. 1)
bescWiessen: inc1ude; imply; embrace;
comprise; make a decision (H. 299)
(ftn. H. 299, 300)
besinnen: consider
(fin. H. 15)
besorgen: *concern; provide (H. 253);
*make provision (H. 106)
But cf. Besorgnis (*worry); Sorge
(care) and its other compounds.
(fin. H. 57)
besprechen: discuss
But cf. sprechen (speak, etc.) and its
other compounds.
(fin. H. 34)
Bestand: content; *stock; subsistence;
etc.
But cf. Lehrbestand (*body of
doctrine, H. 22); Tatbestand
(*facts of the case; *how things
stand, H. 242) ; Bestandstuck
(*component); Bestandart (what
... consists in); bestandig (q.v.).
(fin. H. 36, 303)
bestiindig, Bestandigkeit: steadiness; stability (H. 417); permanent (H. 98)
But cf. Bestand (q. v.).
bestehen: be; consist; subsist; remain;
persist (H. 174); etc.
(ftn. H. 303)

bestimmen:
*determine;
define;
*make definite; *give a definite
character; characterize (*charakterisieren, etc.; kennzeichnen);
attribute (*Attribut; zusprechen);
ascertain (festlegen; feststellen);
*destine
(ftn. H. 15, 344)
(Note: this verb and its tkrivatives are by
no means technical termsfor Heidegger,
but are ubiquitous in German philosophical writing. While we have
found it impossible to adopt any
standard policy for translating them,
we have tried to use forms of 'determine' or 'define' whenever we can do
so without awkwardness.)
bevorstehen, Bevorstand: *impend,
*impendence; stand before; etc.
(ftn. H. 250)
Bewandtnis: involvement (bewenden)
(ftn. H. 84)
bewegen: move; operate; etc.
Bewegtheit: movement
Bewegung: *motion; movement; etc.
bewenden: *involve, involvement (Be:
wandtnis)
(ftn. H. 84)
bezeugen: *attest
But cf. Zeugnis (*testimony; document); Zeug (*equipment, etc.)
and its compounds.
beziehen, Beziehung, Bezogenheit,
Bezug, bezüglich: relate, relation,
relationship, relational, etc.
(Note: 'Bezug' and 'be;:;üglich' have
been translated very freely, but 'unbe;:;üglich' is always translated as
'non-relatwnal'. )
Bild: picture; image (H. 397)
(ftn. H. 217)
(Note: compounds such as 'Gebild',
'bilden', etc. have been translated in
other ways.)
bin: *am
(fin. H. 54)
Charakter, Charakteristik, charakterisieren: character, characterize,
characteristic; factor (H. 5)
(Note: while these words appear quite
frequently, we have used their English
cognates even morefreely.)
.

Glossary of German Expressions

Being and Time
da: there; that; as; here (H. 102,
430)
(f~.
H. 7, 135,4°8)
dabel: ther~ alon~id~; thereby, ete.
BU!
~lt-dabel-sem (Being "in on
lt Wlth someone).

ft-

(fin. H. 85, 119,239)
dagewesen: *has-been-there
d amals: *on that former occasl'on
But cf. damalig (of that time).
dann: then; than; in that case; ete.
(fin. H. 406)
Dasein: *Dasein
(fin.. H. 7, .25,41, 58, 63, 184)
Da-sem: *Bemg-there

Drang: urge
(M,ote: while 'urge' has been reservedfor
prang' andfor 'driingen' and sorne of
11$ compounds, most of these have
usually bem translated in other ways.)

drohen: threaten
D
urchschni tt, durchschnittlich:
*average
d urchs'lCh'
hg: *transparent
B t·1"
d
u 0· un urchsichtig (*opaque).
(fin. H. 5)

echt: genuine
But cf. unecht (*bogus; not genuine).
(fin. H. 5)
(ftn. H. 7)
daseinsmassig: *of the character of eige~; eigenst: own; *ownmost, *most
lts own
Dasein; *of the kind which beBut cf. eig~ntlich (q.v.); Eigenschaft
longs to Dasein; *on the part of
(q.v.); elgnen (*have as its own'
Dasein; Dasein's; ete.
belong; ete.); geeignet (q.v.).
'
(Note: see entry on '-miissig' below.)
. (fin. H. 42)
das Dass: *the "that-it-is"
Elgenschaft: *property
(ftn. H. 135)
(fin. H. 83)
das "Dass es ist": *the 'that it is'
eigentlich: *authentic; *real; properly
(ftn. H. 135)
(H. 171); ete.
datieren: *date (verb)
·
(ftn.
H. 5, 4 2, 329)
Dauer: *duration
emebnen: *level down
But cf. L~bens~auer (*longevity);
~infühlung: *empathy
Unsterbhchkeltsdauer (*immoreinlIolen: catch up
tality); dauern (q.v.)
(ftn. H. 302)
dauern: *to last
einmalig: once for all
But cf. Dauer (q.v.)
einnehmen: occupy; take in (H. 368f)
das Dazu: *the "towards-this"
· (fin. H. 368)
defizient: *deficient
emraumen: *make room
(fin. H. 20)
· (fin. H. III, 368)
determinieren: *Determine
elDSchranken: confine; restrict
deuten: point to; explain
· (ftn: H. 155)
Bu; cf. andeuten (intimate; suggest; elDSprmgen: *leap in; *intervene (H.
hmt); Ausdeutung (*exegesis)'
100)
,
hedeuten (signify; ete.)
· (fin. H. 100, 122)
. (ftn. H. 87)
emwohnen
dlenen: serve; ete.
(fin. H. 54)
(ftn. H. 78)
Ekstase, ekstatisch: *ecstasis, *ecstatiDienlichkeit: *serviceability
cal.
.(fin. H. 78)
(fin. H. 329, 338)
DIfferenz, differenzieren: differeniiate Ende: *end (noun) ete.
But cf.. indif!erent (*Indifferent,
But cf. enden (q.v.); endgültig
*undlfferenhated; ete.)
(q.v.); endlich (q.v.); unendlich
(ftn. H. 429)
(q.v.).
Ding: *Thing
(Note: 'Ende' is usually translated as
But cf. verdinglichen (*reify)
'end' except in the expression 'am
das Dort: *the "yonder"
~nde', whi~h is translated not only as
But cf. das Dorther (*the "thence")'
,'!! the end but also as 'ultimately',
das Dorthin (the "thither").
'
ln the long run', ete.)

enden: end (verb)
But cf. Beendigung (*termination)'
verenden (*perish); vollenden (ful:
fil; complete)
endgültig: final
endlos: *endless
entdecken: *discover; uncover
(fin. H. 33, 218)
entfernen: *desever; *remove
But cf. ent-fernen (q.v.).
(fin. H. 103, 105)
ent-fernen: *de-sever
But cf. entfernen (q.v.)
(fin. H. 105)
entfremden: *alienate
But cf. befremden (*seem strange).
entgegenkommen: accommodate (H.
127f); confront . . . as coming
from (H. 337); come its way (H.
38 4)
entgegenwartigen: *deprive ofits character as present
entgegenwerfen: *throw against
(fin. H. 363)
enthalten: *contain; include; hold
back (*retardieren, H. 169)
But cf. vorenthalten (*withbold, H.
281)
(ftn. H. 61)
enthüllen: *reveal; *unveil; patent
(H. 141)
entrücken, Entrüc~ung: *carry away;
*rapture; Wlthdraw (H. 40 l,
Yorck)
(fin. H. 33 8, 339)

entschliessen: *resolve
(fin. H. 299, 300)
Entschlossenheit: *resoluteness
(fin. H. 297)
Entschluss: *resolution
entspringen: arise; *spring from; *leap
away; source (H. 45,7°); ete.
(fin. H. 347, 348)
entweltlichen: *deprive of its worldhood
entwerfen, Entwurf: *project, *projection
(ftn. H. 124, 145,285,315)
Ereignis: event
erfahren: *experience; undergo; etc.
(fin. H. 46)
erfassen: grasp: *get in one's grasp;
*apprehend; *comprehension (H.
49)

erfüllen: *fill in; fulfill;

509
complete

(verb)
But cf. Normerfüllung (*satisfying a

norm)
(fin. H. 151)

ergreifen: *seize upon; *take hold of;
grasp (H. 332, 384); ete.
erinnern: *remember; *recall
(ftn. H. 339)
erkennen, Erkenntnis: know, knowledge; *cognize, *cognition; recognize (anerkennen, *wiedererkennen, kennen, etc.)
But cf. anerkennen (recognize; acceptance, H. 32); Erkenntnistheorie (*theory of knowledge:
*epistemology).
(fin. H. 36, 123, 124, 146)
(Note: 'verkennen' and 'verfehlen' have
both been translated as 'fail to recogni;;;e' ; 'kenntlich' as 'recogni;:,able' and
*'unrecogni;:.able'.)

edeben, Erlehnis: *Experience
But cf. Er-Ieben (*living-through).
(fin. H. 46)
errechnen: compute
(ftn. H. 48)
erscheinen, Erscheinung: *appear,
*appearance; *apparition (H. 402,
Yorck)
But cf. Krankheitserscheinung

(*symptom of a disease).
(ftn. H. 29)

erschliessen: *disclose; infer (H. 318)
(ftn. H. 75, 15 1, 297, 298, 300,
3 1 5)
erschrecken: *alarm
erstrecken: *stretch along; stretch
(Strecke); extend
erwarten: *expect
erwidern: *rejoin, *rejoinder
(fin. H. 386)
das "es gibt": the 'there is'
(ftn. H. 212,412)
Essenz: *Essence
(fin. H. 117)
essentiell: *Essential
(fin. H. I I 7)

existent, Existenz, existieren: *existent
*existence, *exist
'
But cf. Existenzverfassung (existential
constitution, H. 43)
(ftn·3 0 3)

Existenzial (noun): * existentiale

Being and Time
5 10
existenzial (adj.): *existential
freigegen, Freigabe: *free (verb)
(ftn. H. 12)
(fin. H. 83)
freischwebend: *free-floating; soaring
existenzielI: *existentiell
(ftn. H. 12)
(*überfiiegend, H. 310)
Fundament: foundation (fundieren,
explizit: explicit
*fundamentieren)
But cf. explizieren (explain).
But if. fundamental (q.v.); funda(ftn. H. 149)
mentieren (q.v.).
fundamental: *fundamental
faktisch: *factical
But cf. Fundament (q.v.); funda(fin. H. 7,56)
mentieren (q,v.).
Faktizitiit: *facticity
fundamentieren: *lay the founda(ftn. H. 7,56)
tions
Fhktum: *Fact
But cf. Fundament (q.v.); funda(fin. H. 56)
mental (q.v.).
fallen: falI; etc.
fundieren: *to found; foundation
(fin. H. 134, 428)
(*Fundament; *fundamentieren)
(Note: in gentral verbs terminating in
(fin. H. 340 59)
'-fallen' have been translated by
variants of 'Jall'. Exceptions: auffal- für: for, etc.
(fin. H. 84)
tend (conspicuous); ausfallen (drop
out); beifallen (~lp); enifallen (drop Furcht, fürchten: fear (noun and verb)
But if. hefürchten (*be apprehenout); überfal/en (*assail); qrfal/en
sive); sich fürchten (q.v.).
(*disintegrate; collapse; etc.); J;,UTÜCk(jtn. H. 141, 142)
fallen (*fall back; *relapse); J;,usamwith für: *fear for
.
menfallen (coincide; collapse).)
with um: *fear about
.
fern: far
with vor: fear in the face of . . .
(fin. H. 105)
(Note: white ~ adjective 'Jem' and sich fürchten: *be afraid
(fin. H. 142)
~ derivative noun 'Ferne' have
generally been translated by sorne furchtbar: *fearsome
form of 'Jar', this is not usually furchtsam: *fearful
Fürsorge: *solicitude; *welfare work
~ CQSl with compounds based on this
(H. 121)
stem.)
But cf. Sorge (*care); besorgen
festhalten: *hold fast; adhere (*anhaf(*concern; etc.)
ten) ; keep in mind; reserve; etc.
(fin. H. 121)
(fin. H. 354)
finden: find
ganz: whole (Ganze), *wholIy; com(fin. H. 135)
pletely; quite; altogether; etc.
fliehen, Flucht: flee (flüchtig)
But cf. Ganzheit (q.v.); ergiinzen
But cf. Zuflucht (*refuge; *resort to),
(*round out).
(fin. H. 184)
Ganze: whole (ganz); totality (*Ganzflüchtig: *fugitive; *fleeting; flee
heit; Gesamtheit, H. 28; das AlI)
(*fliehen, *Flucht)
(fin. H. 236)
But cf. verfiüchtigen (*volatilize).
Ganze: *wholeness
fortlaufend: continuing
(fin. H. 236)
(fin. H. 243)
Ganzheit: totality (Ganze; das AlI;
frei: free (adj.)
Gesamtheit, H. 28)
But if. befreien (*liberate); freilegen
But cf. ganz (q.v.).
(*lay bare; *expose to view, H.
(fin. H. 236)
375); Freimut (*ingenuousness); Ganzzein: *Being-a-whole
freihalten (*hold free; *steer c1ear, Ganzseinkônnen:
*potentiality-forH. 33; *keep open, H. 101; etc.) ;
Being-a-whole
freschwebend
(q.v.);
wahlfrei geeignet: appropriate; suited
(*options of choice).
(fin. H. 83)

Glossary of German Expressions
das Gegen: *the "counter to" H. 210)
(ftn. H. 255)
(Note: white ~ prefix 'Gegen-' has
often been translated by 'counter', this
is not always the case; t~ preposition
'gegen' is usually translated in other
ways.)
Gegend: *region
But cf. Region (*realm).
(fin. H. 103)
Gegenstand: object
But cf. Objekt (*Object).
Gegenwart: *Present; *Present-day
(H. 432 n. xxx)
But cf. gegenwiirtig (q.v.); gegenwiirtigen, etc. (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 25, 26, 326, 329, 338,
347)
gegenwiirtig: *in the present
But cf. Gegenwart (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 326)
gegenwartigen: *make present
But cf. Gegenwart (q.v.); entgegenwiirtigen (*deprive of its character
as present); Nichtgegenwiirtigen
(*not-making-present); Ungegenwiirtigen
(*making-unpresent);
vergegenwiirtigen (*envisage).
(ftn. H. 326, 347, 359)
Gehalt: content (*Inhalt; Bestand)
gehôren: belong; etc.
But cf. sich gehôren (*be fitting).
(fin. H. 284)
Geist, geistig: spirit, *spiritual; intellectuai
But cf. Geisteswissenschaft (q.v.).
Geisteswissenschaft: *humane science
But cf. Geist (q.v.).
gelten, Geltung: valid, validity (gültig,
Gültigkeit); be accepted as ..• ;
be regarded as ... ; hold, etc.
(ftn. H. 155)
genuin: genuine (echt)
(ftn. H. 5)
Gerede: *idle talk
But cf. das Geredete (*what is said
in the talk).
geschehen: *historize; happen
(fin. H. 19,371,384)
Geschichte, geschichtlich: *history,
*historical; story (H. 6)
But cf. Historie (*historiology,
*History), etc.
(fin. H. 10)

511

Geschichtlichkeit: *historicality
But cf. Historizitiit (*historicity).
Geschick: *destiny; *vicissitude
(fin. H. 384)
Gestalt: form; pattern; *shape; etc.
gestimmt, Gestimmtheit, Gestimmtsein: (See stimmen.)
gewiirtig, gewiirtigen: await
(ftn. 337, 347)
das Gewesen: *the "been"
gewesen: having been, have been; etc.
(ftn. H. 326)
gewesend: *in the process of having
been
(ftn. H. 326)
Gewesenheit: having been; *the character of having been; etc.
(ftn. H. 326, 328, 329)
gewesen sein: *be as having been
(ftn. H. 326)
gewiss: certain (bestimmt; etc.)
But cf. Gewissen (q.v.).
(fin. H. 291)
Gewissen: *conscience
But if. gewiss (q.v.).
(fin. H. 291)
GewissenhabenwolIen: *wanting to
have a consëience
Geworfenheit: *thrownness
(ftn. H. 135)
Gier: *craving
(fin. H. 346)
gleichgültig: *indifferent
But cf. indifferent (*Indifferent;
*undifferentiated, etc.).
(fitn. H .42, 255,429 )
Gleichmut: *equanimity
(fin. H.-134)
gleichursprünglich: *equiprimordial;
*with equal primordiality
gliedern: *articulate; divide
But if. zergliedern (*dissect); artikulieren (*Articulate).
(ftn. H. 153)
Grenzsituation: *limit-situation
Grund, gründen: ground (Baden; etc.);
*base; basis (*Basis; Baden, etc.);
reason (Vernunft; etc.); *bottom;
etc.
(ftn. H. 34, 15 2)
(Note: most of the compounds in which
the stem 'grund-' or t~ termination
'-grund' appears have been translated
~ith t~ aid of either 'base', 'basic',

5 12

Glossary of German Expressions

Being and Time

Grund~ont.

or 'basis'. Exceptions: 'Abgrund',
'begründen', 'grundlage', 'gründlich',
'Grundsatz', 'grundsiitzlich', 'grundverschieden', 'Hintergrund', '&chtsgrund', 'zugrundeliegen'.)
Grundsein: *Being the basis, *Being a
basis
Grundverfassung: *basic constitution,
*basic state, *basically constituted
gültig, Gültigkeit: valid, valid character (gelten, Geltung)
But cf. endgültig (finally, finality);
gleichgültig (*indifferent).
(ftn. H. 155)
halten: hold; maintain; etc.
(fin. H. 75, 25 6, 347, 354)
(Note: we have made no effort to translate
'halten' and its numerous compounds
in any systematicfashion.)
zur Hand: *to hand
But cf. zuhanden (*ready-to-hand).
handeln: *take action; handle; act,
action; be a matter of
But cf. abhandeln, Abhandlung
(treat,
*treatise);
behandeln
(treat, handle); verhandeln (discuss; *plead one's cause; etc.).
(ftn. H. 300)
handlich: *handy; *manual (adj. HL
109); manipulable
But cf. unhandlich (*unmanageable,
H. 355); leichthandlich (facile,
H·7 8)
Hang: *addiction
hantieren: manipulate
heissen: mean; etc.
(fin. H. 1)
hellsichtig: *have clear vision
(ftn. H. 384)
herannahen: *draw close
hereinstehen: *enter into
Hermeneutik, hermeneutisch: *hermeneutic, *hermeneutical
hervorbringen: bring forth
(ftn. H. 29)
hinhôren: *listen away
(ftn. H. 271)
Historie: *historiology; *History
But cf. Geschichte (*history; story)
(ftn. H. 10, 397)
historisch: *historiological; *Historical
But cf. geschichtlich (*historical)
(fin. H. 10,397)

Historizitat: *historicity
But cf. Geschichtlichkeit (*historicality)
(ftn. H. 10, 20)
horchen: *hearken
hôren: *hear; *listen
(ftn. H. 164,271,284)
(Note: most compounds in which 'Mren'
appears have been translated with
variants of'hear' and 'listen'. But if.
'aufhOren' ('stop'); 'gehOren' ('belong'); 'unerMrt' ('unprecedented').)
hôrig: *thrall to ...
But cf. zugehôrig (belonging) ;
Gehôrigkeit (*belongingness, H.
1 II)

Horizont, horizontal: *horizon, *horizonal
(fin. H. 1)

das Ich: "the "1"
Ichheit: *''l''-hood
identifizieren: identify (feststellen, H.
79)
identisch: *identical
(fin. H. 114)
Illusion: *Illusion
But cf. Schein (*illusion; *semblance;
etc.)
in der Welt: *in the world
But cf. innerweltlich (q.v.); innerhalb
der Welt (q.v.).
(fin. H. 13)
indifferent, Indifferenz: *Indifferent;
*undifferentiated; etc.
But cf. gleichgültig (*Indifferent;
*undifferentiated; etc.
But cf. gleichgültig (*Indifferent).
(fin. H. 42)
innerhalb der Welt: *within the world
But cf. innerweltlich (q.v.); in der
Welt (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 13)
innerweltlich: *within-the-world
But cf. in der Welt (q.v.); innerhalb
der Welt (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 13)
innerzeitig: *within-time
In-Sein, In-sein: *Being-in
intendieren: *intend
(fin. H. 5)
intentional: *intentional

interpretieren, Interpretation: *Interpret, *Interpretation
But cf. auslegen (*interpret; layout)
(fin. p. 1)
Inwendigkeit: *insideness
isolieren: *isolate
(ftn. H. 142 )
J

je meines, Jemeinigkeit: *in each case
mine, *mineness
jeweilig: *current; at the time; particular; any, etc.
jeweils: in every case; on each occasion;
always; any; sometimes (H. 60) ; etc.
kennen: know; be acquainted; acquaintance (der Bekannte, H.
107, 118)
But cf. kenntlich (q.v.); Kenntnis
(q.v.); erkennen (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 124, 146)
kenntlich: recognizable
But cf. kenntlich machen (designate,
H. 151, 351; acquaint, H. 392);
kennen (q.v.); Kenntnis (q.v.).
Kenntnis: information; acquaintance;
knowledge; etc.
But cf. Kenntnisnahme, Kenntnis
nehmen
(*take
cognizance;
acquire information; etc. ); Kennen (q.v.); Erkenntnis (q.v.).
(fin. H. 46, 58)
-kônnen: *potentiality for ... ; etc.
(Note: compounds ending in '-kiinnen'
are very numerous and have usualry been
translated by 'potentiality for . • .'. In
other contexts the verb 'kiinnen' kas been
translated morefreery.)
Konstitution: *Constitution
But cf. Verfassung (*constitution)
(fin. H. 8)
Konstituens, konstituieren, Konstitutivum, konstitutiv: *constituent,
constitute, constitutive (Verfassungs-)
Kontinuitat, kontinuierlich: *Continuity, *Continuous
But cf. Stetigkeit, stetig (*continuity,
*continuous).
(fin. H·42 3)
Lage: *situation
(fin. H. 299)
(Note: compounds terminating in '-lage'
are always translated in other ways.)

laufen, Lauf: run; course
(fin. H. 243)
(Note: most words terminating in
'-larifen' or '-larif' have been translated with either 'run' or 'course'.
Exceptions: AnlauI. anlaufen, durchlaufen, fortlaufen, verlaufen, zuwiderlaufen.)
Leben, leben: *life, *live
But cf. ableben (*demise); erleben,
Erlebnis (*Experience); lebendig
(alive; *lively; *vital; etc.);
Lebensalter (*age); Lebensdauer
(*longevity) ;
Nur-noch-Ieben
(mere aliveness).
(ftn. H. 46, 58)
leicht: light; easy
(fin. H. 360)
Leitfaden: *clue; *guiding-line,
Licht: light, etc.
But cf. lichten, Lichtung (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 133)
, lichten, Lichtung, Gelichtetheit: *clear
(verb) , *clearing (noun), *clearedness; etc.
But cf. Licht (q.v.).
(fin. H. 133)·
das Man: *the "they"
(ftn. H. Il3, 129,253)
das Man-selbst: *the they-self
(ftn. H. 129)
Mannigfaltigkeit: multiplicity; mani.
fold
.massig
(Note: Heidegger uses at least twentythree compounds terminating in
'.miissig', some of them (notabry
'daseinsmiissig' and 'nichtdaseinsmiissig') very frequentry. The original
meaning of this suffix is roughry 'after
the measure of', but Heidegger seems
ta use it primariry as just a device for
constructing adjectives or adverbs from
nouns. We have made no effort to
translate it systematicalry, though in a
few cases we have used 'in accordance
with' (e.g. 'bedeutungsmiissig', 'bewandtnismiissig', 'situationsmiissig',
'stimmungsmiissig', 'weltmiissig').
meinen: mean; have in view; have in
mind; suppose; stand for; etc.
But. cf. Meinung (opinion; suppose,
etc.); vermeinen etc. (suppose;

Being and Time
meinen-cont.
presume; etc.); Vormeinung (assumption);
das
Mitgemeinte
(*connotation).
(fin. H. 1)
melden: *announce
(fin. H. 29)
Methode,
methodisch:
*method;
*methodological; *methodical (H.
49,3 62 )
But if. Methodik, Methodologie
(q.v.).
Methodik, Methodologie: *methodology
But cf. Methode, methodisch (q.v.).
Missmut: *iIl-humour
(ftn. H. 134)
mit: with; etc.
(ftn. H. 84)
(Note: there are overy forty compounds
in which 'mit-' has been used as a
prefix. With about a dozen rather
unimportant exceptions, we have translated these with the help of 'with',
'too', or the prefix 'co-'.)
Mit-dabei-sein: *Being "in on it"
with someone
Mitdasein: *Dasein-with
But if. mit-da-sein.
mit-da-sein: *be there with us
But if. Mitdasein.
miteinander: *with one another
But if. miteinanderteilen (mutual
sharing, H. 155).
mitnehmen: *take along; *carry along
Mitsein: Being-with (Sein mit ..., H.
263)
(Note: this expression is usually followed
by a prepositional phrase introd~ed by
'mit'. Rather than writing 'Beingwith with . . .', we have usually
omitted the second 'with'.)
mitteilen: communicate (*Kommunikation, H. 398f); present (H. 26,
72 n. i)
But if. teilen mit . . . (*share with
... ; impart, H. 168).
Mitwelt: *with-world
Modus: *mode
(ftn. H. 20, 59)
Moment: *item; *momentum (H. 271)
But if.: momentan (*momentary);
momentweise (*from moment to
moment).

nacheinander: *successive, *succession
But ç(. Sukzession (*Succession);
Sich-jagen (*rapid succession, H.
322 ).
nachhangen: *hanker
nachreden: *gossip
Nachsehen: inspection; *perfunctoriness (H. 123)
(fin. H. 123)
Nachsicht: *forbearance
But if. unnachsichtig (relentless,
H·3 0 7)·
(fin. H. 123)
nachspringen: *Ieap after
(ftn. H. 347)
nah: close (adj.); etc.
But if. zunachst (*proximally; *in the
first instance; etc.)
(fin. H. 6)
(Note: while we have usually translated
this expression and its derivatives by
variants of 'close', the superlative
'niichst' occasionally appears as 'next',
'first', 'proximate', 'most intimate', etc.
Exceptions: 'nahelegen'; 'naheliegen'.)
Nahe: c1oseness; etc.
(fin. H. 102)
(Note: with a few trivial exceptions, the
phrase 'in der Niihe' and 'innerhalb der
Niihe' are translated as 'close by'.)
Natur: *Nature; natural (natürlich)
nebeneinander: *side by side
Neugier: *curiosity
(ftn. H. 346, 347)
Nichtheit: *notness
nichtig: *null; *nugatory (H. 237);
*which count for nothing (H. 344)
But if. vernichten (*annihilate;
*nulIify).
(fin. H. 283)
Nichtmehrdasein: *no-Ionger-Dasein
But if. Nicht-mehr-da-sein (*nolonger-Being-there); Nicht-mehrdasein-konnen (*no-Ionger-beingable-to-be-there) .
(fin. H. 250)
das Niemand: *the "nobody"
nivellieren: *Ievel off
das Noch-nicht: *the "not-yel"
But cf. vorlaufig noch nicht (*not
right away).
(fin. H. 259)
Nur-immer-schon-bei:
*just-alwaysalready-alongside
(fin. H. 195)

Glossary of German Expressions
nur_noch-vorhanden: *just present-athand-and-no-more
(fin. H. 74)
Objekt: *Object
But if. Gegenstand, etc. (object).
(ftn. H. 363)
Offenbar, offenbaren; manifest; open
up (H. 124)
offentlich, Offentlichkeit: *public;
*publicness
But if. veroffentlichen (*make public;
*give a public character).
Ohnmacht: *powerlessness
(fin. H. 384)
ontisch: *ontical, *ontico(fin. H. I l , 12)
Ontologie, ontologisch: *ontology,
*ontological, *ontologico(ftn. H. I l , 12)
Ort: *locus; *Iocation; *locative; place
(H. 399, 432 n. xxx) ; etc.
(fin. H. 44)
pflegen: be accustomed to ... ; *Iook
after; etc.
(fin. H. 54)
Platz, platzieren: place
But if. Schauplatz (*arena, H. 388)
praktisch: *practical
(ftn. H. 69)
Privation, privativ: *privation, *privative
(ftn. H. 58)
Projektion: *Projection
But if. entwerfen, Entwurf (*projection, etc.)
(fin. H. 124)
Raum, raumlich: *space; *spatial,
*spatio-; room (H. 103)
But if. Spielraum (*Ieeway); einraumen (*make room); umraumen
(*move around: *rearrange);
wegraumen (*move out ofthe way;
c1ear away).
(fin. H. I I I , 368)
Raum-geben: *give space
(ftn. H. I I I )
real: *Real; *realia (H. 68)
But if. eigentlich (*real, *authentic;
etc.).
rechnen: *reckon; account; *caIculus
(H. 159)
But if. anrechnen (deem); ausrechnen, berechnen (*calculate);

errechnen, rechnerisch (*compute); vorrechnen (*accuse).
Rede, reden: talk; *discourse; words
(H. 30); say (H. 32)
But if.
Ausrede (*subterfuge);
nachreden (*gossip); überreden
(*persuade); verabreden (*stipulate; *make an appointment);
Vorrede (*preface); weiterreden
(*pass the word along). Cf, also
bereden (*talk about); aufreden,
einreden (*talk into); etc.
(ftn. H. 25, 160)
Region: *realm
But if. Gegend (*region).
(ftn. H. 103)
Reife, reifen: *ripeness, *ripen
(fin. H. 244)
Relation: *Relation
But if. Beziehung, Bezug, Verhaltnis
(*relation, *relationship, etc.)
richten: direct (verb); regulate
But if. aufrichten (set up, H. 420);
ausrichten (q.v.); berichten (report); einrichten (arrange; etc.);
Richtung (q.v.) verrichten (perform); zurichten (*adapt).
(fin. H. 102)
Richtung: direction; direct (H. 114);
movement (H. 38, 47); field (H.
13 1 )

Rücksicht: regard; *considerateness; etc.
But' if. rücksichtslos (*inconsiderate;
relentless, H. 333).
(ftn. H. 123)
Ruf, rufen: cali
But if. Anruf, anrufen (q.v.); Aufruf,
aufrufen (q.v.); ausrufen (q.v.);
Beruf, berufen (q.v.); hervorrufen
(*conjure up. H. 175; *evoke,
H. 401); Widerruf (q.v.).
(fin. H. 269, 273, 291)
rügen: *reprove
rühren: touch
Sache: thing; matter; affair; etc.
(fin. H. 27)
(Note: most of the compounds based on
this stem have been translated with the
aid of one of the three expressions
listed, or with 'fact' or 'subjectmatter'. Exceptions: 'sachlich' (q.v.);
'Ursache' ('cause').).
die Sachen selbst: *the things themselves
(fin. H. 27)

Being and Time
sachIich: *objective
But cf. Sache (q.v.); objectiv (*Objective).
Satz: *proposition ; *sentence; principle (*Prinzip; Grundsatz)
(Note: compounds beginning with 'Satz'
have been translated with the aid of
'proposition' or 'propositional', but
compounds with '-satz' as a su.ffix luzw
always bem luzndled in other ways.)
Schein: *semblance; *illusion; seem
(H. 176)
But cf. Illusion (*Illusion).
(Note: except for the adjective 'scheinbar', compounds based on this stem
are not translated by any of the
expressions here listed.)
scheinen: seem
(fin. H. 29)
Schicksal: *fate
But cf. fatal (*fatal)
(fin. H. 384)
schliessen, Schluss: incIude; conclude;
infer; close; etc.
But cf. abschliessen, Abschluss (q.v.);
anschliessen, Anschluss (attach;
etc.); aufschliessen, Aufschluss
(q.!/.); ausschliessen (exclude, rules
out, prevent); beschliessen (q.v.);
einschliessen (include; *enclose,
H. 60); entschliessen, Entschluss
(q.v.); erschliessen (q.v.); umschIiessen (*close round); verschliessen (q.v.); zusammenschliessen (fit
together).
(fin. H. 330)
Schon-sein-hei: *Being-already-alongside
(fin. H. 195)
Schon-sein-in: *Being-aIready-in
(Jin. H. 329)
Schuld: *guilt; *debt; *responsibility
But cf. Unschuld (innocence, H.
292); Verschuldung *indebtedness).
(fin. H. 242, 280)
Schuld haben an ••• : *have responsibility for .•.
schuld sein an . . .: he responsible for
(schuldig)
Schulden haben: *have debts
Schulden machen: *incur debts
schulden: owe
(ftn. H. 281)

schuldig: *guilty; responsible
But ~{. schuldig werden (q.v.).
(fin. H. 280, 281, 282, 287)
sich schuldig machen: *make oneself
guilty; *make oneself responsible
Schuldigsein: *Being-guilty
(fin. H. 281)
schuldig werden: *come to owe;
*hecome guilty
schweigen: *keep silent; *silence
But cf. stillschweigend (tacit); verschwiegen (*reticent)
schwer: heavy, etc.
(fin. H. 360)
sehen: see; look; etc.
But if. Nachsehen (q.v.), etc.
(fin. H. 69, 171)
(Note: in most cases where Heidegger
seems to be concerned with suing or
looking when he uses compounds
involving 'sehen', we luzve translated
them accordingly, but not otherwise.)
seiend: being (sein; etc.); entity (H.
130); is; are
(ftn. H. l, 3)
Seiendes: entity (seiend, H. 130) ;
*entities; that which is (H. 154);
what is (H. 96)
(fin. H. l, 3)
sein: be; being (seiend)
(fin. H. l, 326)
Sein: *Being
(fin. H. 1,4)
(Note: we luzve counted 48 compounds
beginning with 'Sein-' and as many as
106 terminating with '-Sein', or more
frequently '-sein'. With very few exceptions these luzve bem luzndled with
'Being' or occasionally 'being'. Except
for'Bewusstsein' and'Dasein' and sorne
oftheir compounds, none ofthe excepticns
occurs more than once, and WB luzve
usually indicated the German reading.
Cf. 'Entluzltensein' ('is contained'),.
'Enthobensein' ('kas bem *al!eviated'),.
'Hingegebensein' ('devotion'),. 'In-derWelt-gewesensein' (* having-bem-inthe-world') ,. Nicht-rnehr-sein ('is
*no longer'),. 'Noch-nicht-zugiinglichgeworden-sein' ('kas not yet become
*accessible'); 'Oberfal!ensein' ('is
*assailed'),. 'Nochnichtbeisammensein'
('is not yet al! together').
Sein-bei, Sein bei ••• : *Being alongside
(fin. H. 54, 141, 329)

Glossary of German Expressions
Seinkônnen: *potentiality-for-Being
(fin. H. 25 0 )
Seinssinn, Sinn des Seins: *meaning of
Being
Seinsverfassung: *constitution ofBeing;
*state of Being; *constitutive state
of Being; etc.
Sein zu •.. : *Being towards
(ftn. H. 4)
Sein zum Ende: *Being-towards-theend)
But if. Zu-Ende-sein (*Being-at-anend)
(fin. H. 234)
Sein sum Tode: *Being-towards-death
(fin. H. 4, 262)
selbig: *selfsame
(fin. H. 114)
Selbst: *Self
But cf. sich, selbst (itself, oneself, etc.)
(fin. H. 114)
(Note: most of the compounds based on
'Selbst' have bem translated with either
'Self' or 'self' or, more rarely, 'itself',
'oneself', etc. Exceptions: 'Selbstgespriich' (*'soliloquy'),. 'Selbstmord'
(*'suicide'),. 'Selbstverluzlten' ('beluzviour'),. 'selbstverstiindlich (*'selfevident',. 'obvious').)
selbstandig: *self-subsistent
But cf. Selbst-standigkeit (*Self-conconstancy);
Unselbstandigkeit
(*failure to stand by one's Self;
etc.); Unselbst-standigkeit (*nonSelf-constancy).
(fin. H. 117, 128, 29 1, 303, 322,332
375)
Selbsterkenntnis: *knowledge of the
Self
(fin. H. 124, 146)
Selbstsein: *Being-one's-Self; *Beingits-Self; etc.
Sichkennen: knowing-oneself
(ftn. H. 124, 146)
Sicht: sight (noun) sichtbar (q.v.);
But cf. sichten (q.v.); sichtbar (q.v.);
Nachsicht (q.v.); Rücksicht (q.v.),
Umsicht (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 69, 123)
(Note: with afew obvious exceptions, the
word 'sight' is not used in translating
compounds involving 'Sicht'.)
sichtbar: visible (*sichtig, H. 149);
see; etc.
sichten: *sight (verb); *sift (H. 51, 394)

Sichtlosigkeit: *sightlessness
(ftn. H. 69)
Sich-vorweg: (See vorweg.)
Sinn: *meaning; *sense (noun); etc.
(fin. H. l, 137, 151)
(Note: most compounds based on 'Sinn'
have been translated with sorne derivative if 'sense' or 'rnean'. Exceptions:
'sinnend' ('thoughtfully'),. 'besinnen'
(q.v.),.
'einsinnig'
(*'univocal'),.
'tiefsinnig' (*'deep'),. 'widersinnig'
(*'absurd'),. 'sinnlich' (*'sensory,.
*'sensuous').)
Situation: *Situation
But cf. Grenzsituation (*limit-situation).
(fin. H. 299)
(Note: see note on 'situation' in the Index
of English Expressions.)
Sorge: *care
But cf. besorgen (q.v.); Besorgnis
(q.v.); Fürsorge (q.v.); vorsorgen
(take precautions, H. 406, 413).
(fin. H. 57, 121, 17 1)
Spanne,spannen:*span
But cf. gespannt (*spanned; *intent;
*drawn tense, H. 374); urnspannen
(*span round, H. 374; encompass,
H. 64); weitgespannt (broad, H.
242).
(ftn. H. 409)
Spielraum: *leeway
(fin. H. 368)
Sprache, Sprach-, sprachIich: *language; *linguistic
But if. Aussprache (discussion, H.
51 n. xi; pronouncing, H. 161);
Fürsprache (*interceding,
H.
161 f) ; Rücksprache (consulting,
H. 161); Selbstgesprach (*soliloquy); Sprachgebrauch (usage).
(fin. H. 25)
spreizen: (See aufspreizen.)
stlindig: constant (*konstant, H. 416)
But cf. Abstlindigkeit (q.v.); Bodenstandigkeit (*indigenous character,
H. 36; *grounds to stand on, H.
168); eigenstandig (*autonomous;
in its own right; etc.); selbstandig
(q.v.); vollstandig (complete).
(fin. H. 117, 128,291,303,322,332,
375)
Statigkeit: steadiness
But cf. Stetigkeit (q.v.).
(fin. H. 423)

5 18

Being and Time

Stelle: position; ek.
stellen: put; set; formula te; raise, ek.
(fin. H. 300)
(Note: the numerous cfJmpounds of
'stel/en' do not coll for any uniform
policy of translation.)
sterben: *die
But if. absterben, ersterben (*die
away); der Gestorbene (the dead
person, H. 238; ek.); der Verstorbene (*the deceased); sterblich
(*mortal) ;
unsterblich
(*immortal).
stetig, Stetigkeit: *continuous, *continuity
But if. Statigkeit (q.v.); kontinuierlich, Kontinuitat (*Continuous;
*Continuity) .
(fin. H. 423)
stilllegen: *immobilize
(fin. H. 371)
Stimme- *voice
But if. stimmen (q.v.); Stimmung
(q..v.); einstimmig (agreed), ek.
stimmen: *attune; fit (H. 78);
mood (See note.)
But if. bestimmen (q.v.); übereinstimmen, zustimmen, zusammenstimmen,
einstimmig
(*agree);
Ungestimmtheit (*lack of mood').
(fin. H. 134)
(Note: while the participle 'gestimmt' is
oeeasionally translated by some form
of 'attune', it is far more often
translated by variants of' have a mood',
as are its derivatives 'Gestimmtheit'
and 'Gestimmtsein'.)
Stimmung: *mood
But if. Verstimmung (*bad mood).
(fin. H. 134, 144)
Struktur: *structure
Subjekt: *subject (noun)
(Note: all eompounds based on 'Subjekt'
have been translated with the help of
the noun 'subject' or the adjective
'subjective'; but the verb 'subjeet' has
been used only in translating other :expressions, and the noun 'subjeet matter'
has been reservedfor expressions derived
from 'Sache'-chiefly 'sachhaltig'.)
Substanz: *substance
(fin. H. 303)
tasten: touch, *grope; *feel one's way
by touch

But if. antasten (impair, H. 227);
unantastbar (*unimpeachable, H.
59)·
Tatbestand: *facts of the case; *how
things stand (H. 242)
But if. Bestand (q.v.)
Tatsache: fact
But cf. Faktum (*Fact).
tatsiichlich: *factual
(fin. H. 7, 56, 135)
temporal: *Temporal
But if. tempora (*tenses, H. 349)
(fin. H. 17)
Thema, thematisch, thematisieren:
*theme, *thematic, *thematize
(fin. H. 2)
tilgen: *pay off; annul (H. 434)
überantworten: *deliver over
(fin. H. 21)
übereinstimmen: agree
überfallen: *assail
übergeben: transmit
(fin. H. 21)
übergehen, Obergang: pass over;
*transition; ek.
überholen: *outstrip
überhôren: *fail to hear
(fin. H. 271)
überkommen: come down; traditional
(fin. H. 2 l, 383)
überlassen: abandon; ek.
überlegen: *deliberate (verb)
But if. the adjective 'überlegen'
('superior').
überliefern: *hand down; come down;
traditional
(fin. H. 21, 3.83)
übernehmen, Ubernahme: take over
(entnehmen, H. 61, 259); ek.
(fin. H. 383)
überspringen: pass over
überwinden: *overcome; *surmount;
*conquest (H. 105)
Oberzeugung: *conviction
(ftn. H. 256)
um: around; about; in order to; ek.
(fin. H. 8, 65, 69, II, 141)
Umgang, umgehen: *dealings; *deal;
ek.
But if. unumganglich (inevitable;
indispensable; unsociable, H.
125); es geht
um - - - (*- - is an issue for
)
(fin. H. 8, 6~j, 66)

Glossary of German Expressions
das Umhafte: *the aroundness
(fin. H. 101)
Umkreis: range (noun)
(Note: the noun 'range' has been reserved for 'Umkreis' and a few infrequent eompounds in '-kreis' or
'oweite'; the verb 'range' translates a
few other expressions of Little importance.)
umschlagen, Umschlag: *change over
Umsicht: *circumspection
(fin. H. 65, 69, 12 3)
Umwelt: *environment
(fin. H. 65)
das Umwillen: *the "for-the-sake-of"
das Um-zu: *the "in-order-to"
(fin. H. 65, 78)
.
unausdrucklich: tacit; unexpressed;
inexplicit
unbestimmt: *indefinite; *undetermined; *indeterminate (H. 3)
unbezüglich: *non-relational
(fin. H. 25 0 )
undurchsichtig: *opaque
But if. durchsichtig (*transparent)
unendlich: *infinite; *unending (H.
434)
..
But cf. un-endlich (*m-finite).
(fin. H. 330 )
ungehalten: *indignant; *not held on
to
(fin. H. 347)
unheimlich: *uncanny
But if. heimlich (secret).
(fin. H. 188)
Unselbstandigkeit: *failure to stand by
itself
But if. Unselbst-standigkeit (*nonSelf-constancy).
(fin. H. II7, 322)
unterscheiden: differentiate; discriminate; distinguish; differ; ek.
(ftn. H. 429)
U nterschied : difference; distinction;
ek.
(fin. H. 429)
unüberholbar: *not to be outstripped
Ursprung: source
But if. ursprunglich (q.v.).
(fin. H. 348)
ursprunglich: *primordial
But if. Ursprung (q.v.).
(fin. H. 348)

verantwortlich: *answerable
verbrauchen: use up (*aufbrauchen,
H.245)
(fin. H. 333)
verdecken: conceal; *cover up
verdinglicien: *reify
But cf. dinglich (*Thinglike).
vereinzeln: *individualize
(ftn. H. 142)
verenden: *perish
verfallen: fall; deteriorate (verderben,
H. 134)
(fin. H. 21, 134, 175,428 )
verfangen: *entangle
Verfassung: *constitution; *constitutive state; state
But if. Verfassungsmoment (constitutive item); Verfassungsganzheit (*constitutive totality).
(ftn. H. 8)
Vergangenheit: past (vergangen)
But if. Verganglichkeit (q.v.); vergehen (q.v.).
(fin. H. 326, 380)
Verganglichkeit: *transience
But if. Vergangenheit (q.v.).
vergegenwartigen: *envisage
But if. Gegenwart (*Present, etc.);
gegenwartigen (*make present).
(ftn. H. 359)
vergehen: *pass away; transgress (überschreiten)
But if. Vergangenheit (q.v.).
(fin. H. 380)
Note: the participle 'vergangen' is some·
times translated as 'passed away', but
more often simply as 'past'.)
vergewissern: *make certain
(fin. H. 29 1)
verhalten: behave, behaviour (*sich
gebarden, H. 128) ; *comport;
relate; inhibit (H. 253); attitude
But cf. VerhaItnis (q.v.).
(fin. H. 34)
Verhaltnis: relationship, relation
But if. verhaIten (q.v.).
(fin. H. 34)
verhüllen: to veil; to conceal
verlassen: abandon; *forsake
Verlauf: course; ek.
But if. verlaufen (run its course; go
astray; etc.).
(fin. H. 243)
verlegen: *divert; *block; *shift; mis.
place (H. 352); defer (H. 377)

520

Being and Time

vernehmen: perceive; be aware; eU.
vernichten: ·annihilate; ·nullify
Vernunft, vernünftig: reason; rational;
·reasonable (H. 204)
(fin. H. 34)
veroffentlichen: ·make public; ·give
a public character; ·publish;
• publication
verraumlichen: ·spatialize
verrechnen: ·reckon up
But cf. rechnen, etc. (q.v.).
(fitn. H . 48, 300 )
Verschliessen: .close off
Verschuldung: .indebtedness
But cf. Schuld, schuldig, eU. (q.v.).
verschwiegen, Verschwiegenheit:
.reticent, .reticence
Verstand, Verstandnis, verstehen:
• understanding; .understand
But cf. verstandig (q.v.); verstandlich
(q.v.); verstandesmiissig (.intellective, H. 98); Verstandeswesen
(.something endowed with intelligence, H. 49).
(fin. H. 143, ISI)
verstandig, Verstandigkeit: ·commonsense, ·common sense
But cf. Verstand, eU. (q.v.); unverstiindig (·lacking in understanding, H. 21 9); Vorverstandigung
(·first came to an understanding,
H. II).
verstandlich, Verstandlichkeit: ·intelligible, ·intelligibility
But cf. Verstand, etc.
(q.v.);
selbstverstiindlich (.self-evident;
obvious); unmissverstandlich (unmistakable; eU.).
verstellen: .disguise; obstruct (verbauen)
Verstimmung: .bad mood
(fin. H. 134)
der Verstorbene: .the deceased
vertraut: familiar; aware (H. 1)
vertreten: represent; eU.
(fin. H. 239)
verweilen: .tarry
verweisen: .refer; assign
(ftn. H. 31, 68, 70, 84, 408)
verwenden: use; utilize (H. 333) ;
make use; put to use
(ftn. H. 333)
verwirklichen: ·actualize
verwirren:·bewilder; confuse (·zusammenwerfen; verwechseln, H. 138)

vollenden: fulfill; complete (verb)
(fin. H. 243, 244)
vor, vor-: .in the face of; ·face to face
with; fore-; pree; forth; before;
in advance; eU.
(ftn. H. ISO, 184, 291, 327)
vorausspringen: .leap ahead
(fin. H. 122)
vorfallen: .befall
But cf. zu-fallen, Zu-fall (.be-faIl).
vorfi nd en, vorfi ndl'ICh : come across;
h
(H
8)
·s ow up . 10
Vorgabe: (See vorgeben.)
vorgangig: previous; preliminary;
priori beforehand; first; eU.
vorgeben, Vorgabe: present (verb);
give; H. 204; eU.
(fin. H. ISO)
vorgreifen: anticipate
(ftn. H. ISO)
Vorgriff: ·fore-conception; ·something
we grasp in advance
(ftn. H. ISO, 327)
Vorhabe: ·fore-having; something we
have in advance
(fin. H. ISO, 327)
vorhaben: .have before us; .purpose
(H. 1)
vorhanden, Vorhandenheit: .presentat-hand, .presence-at-hand
(fin. H. 7, 2S, 74, 106)
vorkommen: .occur; .come before us
(H. 106)
(fit H
6)
n.. 10
vorlagern: ·lie ahead of
(filtn~ H. 2S9, ~64, 302)
vor aUlen: anticlpate
But cf. vorlaufig (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 262, 264, 302 )
vorlaufig: ·provisional
But cf. Vorlaufigkeit (·anticipatoriness, H. 302); vorlaufig noch nich
(·not right away, H. 2SS, 2S8);
vorlaufen (q.v.).
vorrufen: ·caIl forth
(fin. H. 273, 29 1)
Vorsicht,
Vor-sicht:
·fore-sight;
·something we see in advance
But cf. vorsichtig (·foresightedly, H.
ISO; ·with foresight, H. 2S7).
(fin. H. ISO, 327)
vorspringen: ·leap forth
(ftn. H. 122)

Glossary of German Expressions
vorstehen: manage (H. 143); foregoing; preceding; eU.
(fin. H. 143)
vorsteIlen, VorsteIlung: represent, representation; ·lay before (H. 83);
put before (H. 3°°); ·ideation
(H. 139)
(fin. H. 21 7, 239, 300)
Vor-struktur: ·fore-structure
(fin. H. 327)
vorweg: ·ahead, in advance
But cf. Vorwegnahme (·foreseen, H.
131); vorwegnehmen (take for
granted, H. 147); ·take in advance, (H. 264); anticipate, H.
391).
(fin. H. 329)
vorwerfen: "'reproach; "'throw before
(fin. H. 14S)
Wahl, wiihlen: "'choose, "'choice
But cf. Auswahl, auswahlen ("'select,
·selection).
Wahr, Wahrheit: "'true, "'truth
But cf. wahren, eU. (q.v.); wiihren,
etc. (q.v.). wahrnehmen (q.v.).
wahren: preserve (aufbewahren, H.
380; bewahren; "'verwahren;
erhalten, H. 38o; Sichretten, H.
342)
But cf. wahr (q.v.); wahren, etc.
(q.v.).
wiihren: endure ("'fortwiihrend; "'immerwahrend)
But cf. wahr (q.v.); wahren, etc.
(q.v.); wiihrend (q.v.); bewahren
(confirm; prove, H. 72; "'substantiation, H. 209; etc.); Gewahr,
gewiihren, gewahrleisten (guarantee, assure, grant, eU.)
das "wiihrend": "'the 'during'
But cf. wahren, etc. (q.v.).
wahrnehmen: perceive
But cf. wahr (q.v.).
wegraumen: "'move out of the way;
clear away (lichten)
weitersagen: "'pass along in further
reteIling; .further reteIling
Welt: "'world
But cf. Umwelt ("'environment).
(fin· H. 63, 73)
weltlich: "'worldly; "'after the manner
of the world; ·in a worldly way
(H. 276)

52 1

But cf. Weltlichkeit (q.v.); innerweltlich (q.v.); entweltlichen (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 63)
Weltlichkeit: .worldhood
But cf. weltlich (q.v.); Innerweltlichkeit (q.v.); entweltlichen (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 63)
Weltmiissigkeit: ·worldly character
But cf. weltmiissig (in-accordancewith-the-world, H. 1°4); Weltcharakter (.world-character).
(ftn. H. 63)
werfen, Wurf: .throw; cast H. 41S)
But cf. entwerfen, Entwurf (q.v.);
hinwerfen (.put forward casuaIly,
H. 3Il); hinauswerfen ("'emit,
H. 1II); unterwerfen (subject,
H. 78); verwerfen (rejection, H .
32); vorwerfen (q.v.); zusammenwerfen (confuse).
(fin. H. 13S, 14S)
Werk: work
But cf. hewerkstelligen (accomplish;
eU.); handwerklich (mechanical,
H. 394); Werkzeug, eU. ("'tool,
eU.; "'equipment for working,
H.68).
(fin. H. 70)
Wesen, wesenhaft, wesentlich: "'essence
"'essential; creature (Gebild)
But cf. sein Wesen treibt ("'is haunted
by, H. 392); Lebewesen ("'something living); Nachrichtenwesen
("'information service, H. 126) ;
Verstandeswesen
("'something
endowed with intelligence, H.
49); Essenz ("'Essence).
(ftn.H.117)
das Wider: the "against" (H. 210)
Widerruf: "'disavowal
(ftn. H. 386)
widerstehen, Widerstand: resist, resistance
das Wie: "'the "how"
. wiederholen: "'repeat; "'réstate; "'recapitulate (H. SI, 234); "'over
again (H. 17, 332); raise again
(H·4)
(fin· H. 308, 339, 38S, 386)
wirklich: "'actual
But cf. aktuell (right now, H. 374)'
(fin. H. 7)
wissen: know
But cf. Nichtwissen ("'ignorance).

522

Being and Time

Wissenschaft,wissenschaftlich :*science,
*scientific; *scholarly (H. 32);
learned (adj.) (H. 171); *as a
branch of knowledge (H. 225)
But cf. vorwissenschaftlich (*prescientific; *colloquial, H. 52).
das Wobei: *the "in-which"; *the
"whereat" (H. 107); etc.
(Note: seeourentryon 'bei' above.)
das Wofür: the "for-which" (das
Wozu, H. 414)
das Woher: *the 'whence'
das Wohin: *the 'whither'
wohnen: *reside; accustom (pflegen)
(fin. H. 54)
wollen: *want; will; *volition (H. 136,
139); insist upon (H. 253, 265);
seek; etc.
das Womit: *the 'with-which'; etc.
das Woraufhin: *the 'upon-which' etc.
(Note: 'woraufhin' has been translated
in many ways, depending on the
contexts.)
das Woraus: *the "whereof"
das Worin: *the "wherein"; etc.
das Worinnen: *the "inside-which";
etc.
das Worüber, das Worum; about
which; etc.
(ftn. H. 141)
das Worumwillen: *the "for-the-sakeof-which"; etc.
das Wovor: that in the face ofwhich;
etc.
das Wozu: *the "towards-which"; the
"for-which" (H. 414)
(fin. H. 78, 84, 414)
Wurf: throw (werfen)
But cf. Entwurf (projection).
Zeichen: sign
But cf. Anzeichen (symptom; *betoken, H. 185); Anführungszeichen (*quotation mark); Fragezeichen (*question mark); Vorzeichen (*warning signal).
zeigen: show; indicate
But cf. Anzeige, anzeigen (indicate;
cali attention); aufzeigen (exhibit;
point out; point to; *point at, H.
215); Zeiger (*pointer).
(fin. H. 29, 77, 122, 178,304)
Zeit: time; era (H.401)
But cf. Zeitbestimmtheit (*temporal
character, H. 203, 370; *temporal

attribute, H. 333); zeitgenossisch
(*contemporaneous);
Zeitigen
(q.v.); zeitlebens (*for its lifetime;
*for life, H. 370); zeitlich (q.v.);
Zeitstufe (*temporal stage); Folgezeit (*posterity); Zeitalter (era);
unzeitgemiiss (*out of season).
(fin. H. 304, 329)
Zeitablesung, Ablesung der Zeit:
*reading off the time; *telling the
time (H. 70)
Zeitangabe, Zeit angeben: *assigning
atime
(fin. H. 408)
zeitigen: *temporalize; *bring to
maturity; bring about (*herbeiführen, H. 261)
(ftn. H. 22, 122, 178, 235, 403)
zeitlich: *temporal
But cf. neuzeitlich (of modern times,
H. 49); temporal (*Temporal).
(fin. H. 17, 304
sich zeitnehmen: *take one's time
Zeitrechnung: *time-reckoning
zergliedern: *dissect
zerstreuen: *disperse; *distract
Zeug: *equipment; *item of equipment
But cf. Schreibzeug (*inkstand;
*equipment for writing); Schuhzeug (*footgear); Werkzeug (q.v.);
Zeugnis (q.v.).
(fin. H. 68, 74)
Zeugganze, Zeugganzheit: *equipmental totality, *totality of equipment
Zeugnis:
*testimony;
document
(*Dokument, *dokumentieren)
das zu: the "towards"
(ftn. H. 84, 329)
(Note: the preposition ';;;u' has of
course been translated in many other
ways.)
Zu-Ende-sein: *Being-at-an-end
But cf. Sein zum Ene (*Beingtowards-the-end)
(fin. H. 234)
Zufall, zufaIlig: *accident, *accidental;
*chance; *haphazard (H. 37,
398); *incidental (H. 310)
But cf. Zu-fall, zu-fallen (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 300)
Zu-fall, zu-fallen: *be.falling, *be-fall
But cf. Zufall, sufallen (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 300)

Glossary of German Expressions
Zugang, zuganglich: *access, *accessible
(fin. H. 44)
zugehôrig, zugehoren: belong to
(fin. H. 163)
zuhanden, Zuhandenheit: *ready-toband, *readiness-to-band
But cf. zur Hand (q.v.).
(ftn. H. 25, 74, 104, 106)
das Zuhause: *the "at-home"
zukommen: come towards; belong to;
go with etc.
(fin. H. 32 5, 32 9)
(Note: whenever ' ;;;ukommen' is used
with the preposition 'auf', it is translated by 'come towards'; but when it is
used with the dative, it is translated in
other ways. It is apparently not used in
other constructions.)
Zukunft: *future (noun)
But cf. Zu-kunft (q.v.); zukünftig
(q.v.).
(ftn. H. 325, 329)
Zu-kunft: *the future as coming
towards
But cf. Zukunft (q.v.).
(fin. H. 325)
zukünftig: *futural*future (adj. H. 141,
34 1,343)
But cf. Zukunft (q.v.); Zukünftigkeit
(*futural
character,
H.
395;
*futurity, H. 424f).
(fin. H. 329)
zumeist: *for the most part; *mostly
(fin. H. 16)
zumuten: *exact (verb); impose (H. 39)

But cf. rachen sich (*exact their
penalty, H. 174).
zunachst: *proximally; *in the first
instance; first; right now (H. 253);
etc.
But cf. nachst. (See entry on 'nah' above.)
(fin. H. 6, 16)
zur Hand: *to hand
But cf. zuhanden (q.v.).
das Zurück auf: *the "back to"
(fin. H. 329)
zurückkommen: *come back
(fin. H. 329, 383),
zurücknehmen, Zurücknahme: *take
back
(fin· H. 308, 344)
Zusammenhang, zusammenhlingen:
*connection, *connect; *interconnection, *interconnect; *context; *bang together
Zu-sein; to he
(fin. H. 42)
zuweisen: assign; allot; give (H. 154)
(ftn. H. 68, 408)
zweideutig: *ambiguous
But cf. doppeldeutig (*gets used in
two ways; double signification);
Doppelsinn (*double meaning);
Doppelbedeutung (double signification); vieldeutig (*has many
significations; *is used in several
ways).
das Zwischen: *the "between"
(Note: in compounds 'Zwischen-' is
often translated as 'intermediate 1)

Index of English Expressions

INDEX OF ENGLISH EXPRESSIONS
a priori.
(See Index of Latin Expressions.)
tabandon: überlassen; verlassen (H.)
überlassen
a. tooneself: H. 141, 192, 277, 308,
347,365
a. to one's own null basis: H. 348
a. to one's having-been: H. 365
a. to having made a choice: H. 384
a. to definite possibilities: H. 270
a. to one's thrownness: H. 345
a. to the disposaI of the "they": H.
193
a. to the world: H. 172,412
a. to a 'world': H. 356,406, 412f.
a. to the past: H. 386
the "about which": das Worum; das
Worüber
das Worum
(ftn. H. 141)
offear: H. 14of
ofanxiety: H. 187f, 191,251,266,
342f
das Worüber, worüber
ofassertion: H. 158,218,224
of discourse or talk: H. 161f, 164,
168, 272
ofjudgment: H. 216
absolute: absolut; schlechthinnig
(utler; etc.)
absolut: H. 229, 3 18, 432-434
absorb, be absorbed: aufgehen
(fin· H. 54)
abstract (adj.), abstraction: *abstrakt,
*Abstraktion
H·401 (Torek); 429-435 (Hegel)
tabsurd: "widersinnig
H.152
tabyss: *Abgrund
(fin. H. 152)
H.152
access, accessible: *Zugang, *zuganglich
(fin. H. 44)
accident, accidentaI: Zufall, zufallig
(fin. H. 3°°)
taccommodate: fügen (H. 69); entgegenkommen (H. 127f)

account
(See due on account, settle an account, take account.)
acquaint, acquaintance, be acquainted:
kennen, Kenntnis; kenntlich
machen (H. 392); des Bekannte
(H. 107, 118)
act, action: *Akt, *Aktion; handeln;
etc. handeln: (See entry for 'take action'
below.)
But cf. activity (*Aktivitat; *Tatigkeit; Treiben; etc.)
tAkt; 47f (Scheler); 115, 119, 139,
(Scheler), 193, 352, 391
actual, actuality: *wirklich, *Wirklichkeit
(fin. H. 7)
a. and possibility: H. 38, 143, 195,
236, 243, 254, 261f, 299, 347
'world'-a.: H. 62i 195
a. of Things: H. 99
'external a.' (Dilthey): H. 205 n. xv
historical a.: H. 10, 378
validity as 'form' ofa.: H. 156
'a.' subjectivity: H. 229
conscience as 'a.' subsisting (Stoker):
H. 272 n. vi
agreement with a.: H. 62
momentary a., etc.: H. 373f
tactualize, actualization: *verwirklichen
H. 261f, 293, 38 5, 434f
taddiction: *Hang; hangen an (depend on, ding to)
(ftn. H. 182, 194)
H. 182, 194- 196, 345
address: ansprechen (consider); *adressieren; wenden an
(ftn. H. 34, 408)
advance
(See grasp in a., have in a., see in a.
take in a.)
taesthetic: *asthetisch
H. 396, 399f, 402
affect, affection: *Affekt, *Affektion,
*affizieren; betreffen (pertain, etc.) ;
etc.
But cf. affectation (Manier).
H. 137- 14°, 142, 173, 34 1, 345f

the afraid: *sich fürchten
(fin. H. 142 )
H. 141f, 186, 189, 341f
the "against": das Wider
H.21O
aggregate: das AlI (totality); Gesamtheit (H. 366); *Inbegriff (H. 65)
the aggregate of entities: H. 8, 14,
64, 24 1, 248
the aggregate of the present-athand: H. 362
(Note,' this list includes those passages in which 'rias Ali' has been
translated as 'totali!J!'.)
agree, agreement: *übereinstimmen;
*zustimmen; *zusammenstimmen; *einstimmig
t*übereinstimmen: H. 33,62,214-225
teinstimmig: H. 281, 413, 418
ahead: vorweg
But cf. lie ahead (*vorlagern); leap
ahead (*vorausspringen).
tahead of itself: sich vorweg
(fin. H. 329)
H. 191-196,202,220, 227f, 236, 244,
249-251,259,277,315,317,322,
3 27, 337, 406, 4 25
alarm: *erschrecken
H.142
alien: fremd (*foreign; strange, etc.)
But cf. befremden (seem strange, embarrass)
H. 121,172,275, 277f, 356
talienate: *entfremden
H. 178,180,254, 346f, 396
alleviate: entheben (exempt); erleichtern
H. 134f, 256, 345
allot: anweisen; zuweisen; *bescheiden
allow time
(See time.)
alongside: bei
(fin· H. 54, 14 1, 239, 329)
the 'already': das Schon
H. 327f
ambiguous, ambiguity: *zweideutig,
*Zweideutigkeit
H. 134, 173-175 (Section 37); 177,
180, 222, 253-255, 271, 298~
346,378 ,384
tanalogy: *Analogie
H. 3,93
analysis: *Analyse, *Auseinanderlegung
t ana?ysis situs
H.II2

analytic: *Analytik
ancient ontology, etc.
H. 3f, 19, 24-26, 44, 49, 154, 160,
235,4°3,421 ,437
the 'and-now-not-yet': das "und jetzt
noch nicht"
(See now-not-yet.)
animaIs
H. 70, 246, 346
(See also,' animal ratione in Index of
Latin Expressions.)
tannounce: *melden
(fin. H. 29)
H. 8, 29-31, 72-75, 80, 96, 192,252
tanswerable: *verantwortlich
H. 127,288
tanthropology: *Anthropologie
(ftn. H. 17)
H. 16f; 45-50 (Section 10); 131, 183,
190, 194, 199 n. vii, 200, 249 n. vi,
272, 272 n. vi, 290, 300
anticipate: *vorlaufen; *vorgreifen;
(ftn. H. 262, 264, 302)
*vorlaufen
(tif. H. 262-264, 309, 326, 336 )
H. 262-267, 301-305; 3°5-310
(Section 62); 316-318, 322-326,
331,336,339,345,35°,382-386,
390~ 4 24
tantiquarian: *antiquarisch
H. 396f, 400
anxiety, he anxious: Angst, *sich
angsten
(ftn. H. 182, 277)
(tif. H. 182, 191, 25 1, 342-344)
H. 140, 182-184; 184-191 (Section
40); 192, 199, 235 n. vi, 25 1,
254, 258, 265f, 276f, 296f, 301,
305, 308, 310, 322, 342-345
readiness for anxiety: H. 382,385, 391
tapophantical: *apophantisch
H. 33f, 155b , 433, 435
thea. "as": H. 158,223
,
appeal: *Anruf, *anrufen, berufen
But cf. court of appeal (Instanz)
(fin· 269, 273»)
*Annu, *anrufen: H. 269-280; 280289 (Section 58); 292, 294-297,
300, 307, 3 17
appear, appearance: *erscheinen,
Erscheinung
But cf. outward appearance (Aussehen, H. 69)
(fin. H. 29) (tif. H. 29-3 1)
H. 23, 29-3 1, 35f, 78 , 321 , 436 .

Being and Time
tapperception: *Apperzeption
H. 319, 319 n. xvi
tbe apprehensive: *befürchten
But cf. apprehend (erfassen)
H. 57, 117, 142, 345
appropriate (adj.): geeignet (suited,
etc.); angemessen (proper; suited; etc.); gemiiss; -massig
But cf. inappropriate (ungeeignet,
unangemessen, nicht zukommen)
(ftn. H. 83)
(verb):
*zueignen;
appropriate
aneignen (make one's own)
*zueignen: H. 6g, 127, 148, 15of,
160-162, 167-17°, 196,222,231,
296,299
a priori
(See Index of Latin expressions.)
arise: entspringen; entstehen (emerge;
rise); etc.
(fin· H. 347)
arising and passing away: *entstehen und vergehen
H. 328, 33of, 333, 338, 420, 423,
425, 43 0f
the "around": *das Urnherum
H.66
taroundness: *das Urnhafte
(fin. H. 101) (dj. H. 103)
H. 66, 79, 101, 103, 112
tarrow: *Pfeil
H·78f
t Articulation: *Artikulation
(fin. H. 153)
H. 3, 8, 54, 104, I I I , 129, 149, 151,
155-159, 161f, 165, 168,201,206,
3 1l, 335, 349, 362 -364, 369,
406, 408f, 416
articulation: Gliederung
(ftn. H. 153)
H. 153, 161f, 166, 168f, 196, 200,
234,27 1,3 17, 324f, 327, 35 1
the 'as': das "AIs'" the as-structure:
die AIs-Struktur
But cf. the 'just as' (das "So-Wie");
Being as it is (Sosein)
H. 149-151, 154, 158f, 223, 359f
tthe 'as-it-already-was': *das "wie es
je schon war"
H·3 2 5f
aspect: *Aspekt; *Aktionsart
Aktionsart: H. 349
tassail: *überfallen
H. 70, 136, 195,296,328,344,355

assertion: Aussage, *aussagen
(ftn. H. 62, 149) (dj. H. 154-157)
H. 4, 32, 36, 62, 133, 149, 153- 160
Section 33), 161-165, 183, 21 4,
217f, 223-228, 273
assign: verweisen; anweisen; zuweisen;
angeben, Angabe
(ftn. H. 31,68, 70,84,87,408)
verweisen
(dj. H. 68ff, 77ff)
H. 31, 68-71, 74f, 76-83 (Section
17), 84, 86-88, IIof, II7, 123,
129, 149, 151, 158, 192, 210,
250, 258, 29of, 360
(Note: this List also i"ûudes the more
important passages in which 'verweisen' kas been translated as
'reJer'.)
tangeben, Angabe: H. 4°8-410, 413,
4 18,422
astronomical time-reckoning, etc.
H. 371, 411,418,418 il. v
tat home: *zuhause
H. 188f, 276
at the time: jeweilig
But cf. time (Zeit, etc.)
tatheoretical: *atheoretisch
H. 59, 69, 358
*attest: bezeugen
H. 234f, 254, 258, 267-301 (II, III:
Sections 54-60), 302, 305f, 309
attitude: Verhaltung; Einstellung; etc.
tattunement: Gestimmtheit
(fin. H. 134)
H. 134, 137,277, 335
authentic: eigentlich
(fin. H. 5,42, 329) (dj. H. 42f, 53)
a. anxiety: H. 190
a. appropriation ofuntruth: H. 299
a. Being of Dasein: H. 44, 188, 191,
32 2
a. Being-come-to-an-end: H. 239
a. Being-guilty: H. 291
a. Being-one's-Self: H. 129,184,263,
268,298
a. Being-towards-death: H. 237, 26026 7 (Section 53), 373
a. Being towards oneself: H. 122
a. Being-a-whole; H. 267
a. care: H. 122, 301, 323
a. certainty: H. 258, 308
a. coming towards: H. 330
a. constancy of the Self: H. 410
a. disclosedness: H. 221, 297, 325,
33 1,397

Index of English Expressions
authentic---l:ont.
a. dying: H. 247
a. encountering of the un-ready-tohand: H. 73
a. existence: passim
a. existentiell possibility: H. 193,
26 7- 27° (Section 54)
a. face to face with thrownness: H.
348
a. "for-the-sake-of-which": H. 193
a. future: H. 329f, 336-338, 348
a. grasping of a sign: H. 79
a. guilty: H. 287
a. hearing the calI: H. 294
a. historicality: H. 382, 385-387, 39of,
395f
a. historiological: H. 395
a. historizing: H. 382, 385, 387
a. history: H. 386
a. maintaining oneself in a primordial possibility: H. 306
a. making present: H. 410
a. possibilities of existence: H. 383
a. possibility which has been: H. 394
a. potentiality-for-Being: H. 233235, 266, 267-301 (II, III) 322,
339, 343f
a. potentiality-for-Being-one's-Self:
H. 175, 322f
a. potentiality-for-Being-a-whole: H.
235, 266f, 301-333 (II, III), 372
a. Present: H. 338
a. readiness-to-hand: H. 69, 106
a. repetition: H. 385
a. resoluteness: H. 308, 310, 313, 382
a. Self: H. 129f, 433 (Hegel)
a. temporality: H. 327, 329, 331,
338, 348, 375, 385, 4 14
a. "there"; H. 328, 347
a. time: H. 329
a. transparency: H. 298
a. truth of Dasein: H. 297, 302
a. understanding: H. 146,364, 279f,
295,3°2,3°6,348,383,425
(Note: see also H. 184, 190, 233,
259, 306, 350. See also 'real'.)
average: *Durchschnitt, *durchschnittlich
(cff: H. 43)
H. 4-6, 8, 16, 2l, 43f, 50 n. x, 53, 66,
7 1, 10 7, 121, 127-129, 168-17°,
181, 188, 195, 232, 248, 254,
272,331,370,383,406,410
tawait: *gewartig, *gewartigen
(fin. H. 337, 347)

52 7

H. 337-339, 34 1-343, 347f, 350, 353356, 359-361 ,363, 368f, 37 l,39of,
4°6-410,412-414,416, 420f, 425
aware: vernehmen, vertraut
(See perceive.)
But cf. unawares (unversehens).
tback away: *ausrücken
(ftn. H. 339)
H. 339, 341f
bad conscience: *scWechtes Gewissen
(See conscience.)
bad mood: *Verstimmung
(See mood.)
balance off: ausgleichen, Schuldbegleichung
But cf. evenly balanced (ebenmiissig)
242, 283, 288, 292f
base, basic, basis: Grund, gründen;
Boden (soil, ground, etc.); Basis;
etc.
(See also on the basis of.)
t befalI: *vorfallen
H.158,279, 284,290
tbe-falI, be-falling: *zu-falIen, *Zu-fall
(fin. H. 3°°)
H. 3°0,410
the 'before': das "Vor"
(fin. H. 327)
H. 327f
beginning: Anfang (outset, etc.)
H. 233, 238, 373, 424
behave, behaviour: verhalten; sich
gebiirden (H. 128)
behold: anschauen; *schauen
(See intuition.)
Being: *Sein, Sein-, -sein
(fin. H. 1,4, 1l, 212)
(Note: except in a few cases which we
shall List explicitly below, expressions
beginning or ending with 'be', 'being',
or 'Being' will be indexed according to
their other components. Thus, for 'be
anxious', see 'anxiery'; for 'Beingguilry', see 'guilt';for 'spatial Being',
see 'spatial', and so on. Cf. our
remarks on 'Sein' in the glossary.
While the word 'Being' appears on
nearly every page, we shall content ourselves with listing here a few passages
which are particularly relevant to the
problem ofBeing in general.)
H. 1-15 (Int. 1), 15-27 (Sections 5,
6), 35, 37f, 54, 92-94, 183, 196,
208, 212f, 230f, 235, 241, 314,

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time
Being-cont.
333,349,357,366,372,392,406,
4 19, 430f, 436-437 (Section 83)
tBeing against one another: *Widereinandersein
H.121
t Being alone: *Alleinsein
H. 120f
tBeing alongside: *Sein bei
(ftn. H. 54, 14 1, 329)
H. 54f. 107, 109, 119f, 131, 141, 146,
148,172,181,189, 192f, 196,202,
21 l, 220, 223, 238, 249f, 252, 263,
298,31 l, 317,322,326-328,337,
351-353, 363-365, 406-408, 4 13,
4 19,422
tBeing already: *Schon-sein
H. 194,365
t Being-already-alongside: *Schon-seinbei
(ftn. H. 195)
H. 61, 109,277
*Being-already-in: *Schon-sein-in
(fin. H. 329)
H. 192f, 195f, 202, 220, 249f,277,317,

32 7

tBeing, among-one-another: *Vntereinandersein
H.128
tBeing as it is: *Sosein
H. 5,7, 14,42
*Being-the-basis: *Grundsein
H. 282-285, 305
tBeing for one another: *Für-einandersein
H.121
Being-in: *ln-Sein, *ln-sein
H. 41, 52-59 (Section 12), 105f, 119,
123, 130-180 (l, V), 186, 189f,
193,200, 202, 297, 350
Being-in-itself,
Being-in-themselves:
An-sich-sein; An-ihm-selbst-sein
(H.90 )
(Note: see entry for 'in itself'.)
tBeing 'in' one another: *"ln"einandersein
H·54
tBeing "in on it"with someone: *Mitdabei-sein
H.174
t'Being in something': *"Sein in .. .'
H·54
Being-in-the-world: *ln-der-Welt-sein
H. 13, 41, 52-62 (l, II), 104-110

(Section 23), 113-180 (l, V),
350-366 (Section 69), et passim
Being-its-Self
(See Being-one's-Self.)
t Being-on-the-scent: *Auf-der-Spursein
H.173
tBeing-one's-Self, Being-its-Self; *Selbstsein
H. 41, 113-13° (l, IV-esp. 126-130,
Section 27), 131, 146, 176, 184,
263, 267f, 270, 284, 298, 323
(Su aIso potentiality-for-Being-one'sSelf.)
t Being out for ... : *Aussein auf ...
H. 195,210, 261f
t Being-something: Etwas-Sein
H.160
tBeing-there: *Da-sein
But cf. Being there alongside:
Dabeisein (239)
(fin· H. 7)
H. 55, 126, 132f, 134-14° (Section
29), 142-148 (Section 31), 160166 (Section 34), 189, 347, 350
(See aiso no-Ionger-Being-there.)
Being towards: *Sein zu
(fin. H. 4, 234, 262)
B. t. the beginning: H. 373
B. t. the Dasein that has-been-there:
H·394
B. t. death: H. 234, 235-267 (II, 1),
301f, 3°5-30 7, 309f, 329, 337,
344, 348f, 373f, 386, 390
B. t. the end: H. 245, 247, 249-252,
254, 255-260 (Section 52), 255
df., 265, 305, 3 17, 329, 372f,

42 4

B. t. entities: H. 4, 121,218,222-225
B. t. God: H. 10, 190 n. iv
B. t. oneself: H. 124f, 173, 177
B. t. Others: H. 124f, 177
B. t. possibilities: H. 148, 236, 261264,3 29
B. t. one's ownmost potentiality-forBeing: H. 188, 191 df., 192f,
195,221,255,3°6,3 25
B. t. the ready-to-hand: H. 298
B. t. the thing that itselfhas been uncovered: H. 256
B. t. a totality of involvements: H.
15°
B. t. ways of comporting oneself: H.
21I

Being towards-cont.
B. t. what is brought close: H. 106
B. t. " "de-severed: H. 106
B. t. " "heard: H. 155
B. t. " "indicated: H. 82
B. t. " "pointed out: H. 155
B. t. " "seen: H. 172
B. t. " "talked about: H. 168
B. t. the world: H. 57, 61f, 106, 122,
177
(Su aiso H. 108, 125, 194).
tBeing-what-it-is: *Was-sein
H·42
Being-with: *Mitsein, ·Sein mit (H.
2630oly)
H. 41, 113-13° (l, IV, esp. Sections
26, 27), 131, 142, 146, 161-164,
181, 193,237-238,25°,263-264,
270-272,280-293,288,298,384,
386, 406, 410
belong: gehoren; zugehôren; hingehoren; angehoren; zukommen;
eignen; etc.
(fin. H. 163, 284, 325)
H. 65, 68, 102f, 108, 1lOf, 126, 163,
242f, 246, 368, 378-381, et passim
the "between": das Zwischen.
H·55, 108, 13 2,233, 373f, 390
(Su also the "in-between".)
bewilder: verwirren
H. 141, 341f, 344, et passim
bind: verbinden; binden; verklammern; etc.
judgment as binding together: H.
32f, 159f, 3 19
binding together of intentional acts:
H·49
binding together of people devoted
to the same affair: H. 122
validity as universally binding, etc.:
156, 278, 312-314, 362
time as bound up with location: H.
4 17

et passim

biography
H. 16, 247, 361
biology
H. 10, 28,45, 49f, 58, 237, 241, 246249, 269, 275
fbirth: *Geburt
H. 233, 363f, 38 7, 390f, 394
body: Leib (figure); Korper (corporeal); *Leibkorper; etc.
H. 29, 48, 54, 56, 60, 91, 96f, I07f,
117, 121, 147, 198,346,368,416

botany
H. 35, 46,70
breaks (in a referential context):
Bruch
H·75f
breaking a law
(See law-breaking.)
brightness: Helle (light), Helligkeit
H. 28, 350, 412
tbring about: zeitigen, *herbeiführen
(fin. H. 22, 304
H. 22, 178, 261
bring back: *zurückholen; *zurückbringen; *Rücknahme
*zurückholen
H. 189, 191, 268, 271, 287, 289,
296, 3 28, 338,- 349
*zurückbringen
H. 271, 340, 343f, 346, 391
bring close: *nahern, *nahebringen.
bring closer: *naherbringen
tbring forth: *hervorbringen; *vorholen
(ftn. H. 29)
H. 30, 339
tbring to maturity: zeitigen
(fin. H. 122, 304)
H. 122, 152
burden: *Last; etc.
H. 122, 127f, 134, 268, 284, 299,
345,37 1
the 'business of philosophers': das
"Geschaft der Philosophen"
(Su philosophy.)
fcalculate: *berechnen; *ausrechnen
But cf. calculus (Rechnen)
H. 102, 106, I I If, 258,261,294,3°7,
324, 418n. v, 420
tcalender, calendrical: *Kalender,
*kalendarisch
H. 370, 376, 407, 41 1,418
cali: *Ruf, *rufen; nennen; etc.
(fin. H. 26g, 273, 291)
H. 269-272, 272-274 (Section 56);
274-280 (Section 57), 281, 286296, 300, 305, 307, 310
cali back: *Rückruf, *zurückrufen
H. 277, 280, 287, 291, 294, 296
cali forth: *vorrufen
H. 273f, 280, 287, 290f, 294, 300,
3°5
cali to: anrufen, zurufen (See aiso
appeal).
H. 273, 288

53°

Being and Time

call~ont.

call of conscience: *Gewissensruf,
*Ruf des Gewissens
H. 269-280, 288f, 307, 317
'It' calls: *"es" ruft,
H.275- 278
care: *Sorge, *sorgen
(fin. H. 57, 121, 171)
(4[. H. 23 1, 249, 284f, 306, 3 16f, 329,
335, 346, 350, 364, 374, 406,
43 6)
H. 41, 57, 121f, 126, 131, 17 1- 174,
180-230 (l, VI), 231, 233, 235f,
246, 249, 25 1f, 254, 259, 265,
270, 274-280 (Section 57), 284289,298,300,310-333 (II, III),
334f, 337, 344, 346, 353f, 359,
264, 36 7, 37 2, 374, 376 , 382,
385, 390, 397, 406, 4 11f, 4 19,
4 24,436
carry along: (Su entry for 'take along'
helow.)
carry away: entrücken
(See rapture.)
case of death: Todesfall
(See death.)
tcatch up: *einholen; *aufholen
H. 97, 126, 302, 307, 39 1
(ftn. H. 302)
t category, categorial: *Kategorie,
*kategorisch
(4[. H. W, 54)
H.3, Il, 21f, W, 54-56, 63, 65, 68,
71, 78, 88, 105, 1I8f, 135, 143,
157 (categorical), 165, 188,241,
2~. iii, 318, 320 n. xix, 377,
299f,402f
tcause, causation: *Ursache, *verursachen
But cf. causality (Kausalitat-32o n.
xix), causal inference (Kausalschluss-204), plead its cause
(verhandeln).
H. 19°,246,282-284,352
certain: gewiss
(fin. H. 291) (dj. H. 256)
H. 24, 136, 177, 255-258, 264-266,
29 1-293, 302, 307f, 362 , 435, et
passim, wechseln; verandem; etc.
H. 9D-92, 97, 108, 114, 203f, 375, 389
tchange over: *Umschlag, *uIDSchlagen
H. 134, 158 , 238 , 357, 360f, 364
choice, choose: *Wahl, *wiihlen
H. 7, 12,21,42, 188, 194,264, 268,

270, 287f, 298, 37 1, 383-385, 391,
394-396
Christian theology and anthropology
H.48, 190n. iv, 199 n. vii, 229, 249
t chronology: *Chronologie
H·4 18f
circle: *Zirkel; Kreis
H. 7f, 152f, 314f, 432 n. xxx
circuIDSpection: *UIDSicht
(fin. H. 65, 69, 123)
H. 69, et passim
circuIDStance: *UIDStand
But cf. factual circuIDStance (Sachverhalt)
H. 177,3°0,338,379, 382, 384, 389
clairvoyance
(ftn. H. 384)
clear (verb), clearing (noun), clearedness: lichten, *Lichtung, *Gelichtetheit
(fin. H. 133) (4[. H. 170, 350)
H. 133, 170, 35of, 408)
But cf. clear away (lichten, wegraumen), clear up (klaren), clear
(klar, deutlich, etc.)
tclear vision: *hellsichtig
(fin. H. 384)
H. 384.
clock: *Uhr
H. 7of, 376, 404, 413-418, 420f
close (adj.): nah
(ftn. H. 6, 102)
(See glossary entries on 'nah' and
'NiiM.)
close (verb): schliessen
(fin. H. 330)
H. 114> 330
tclose off, *verschliessen
H. 23, 124, 132, 136, 141, 169f, 173,
178, 184,195,222,273,276,286,
288, 300, 306 n. ii, 308, 311, 339f,
342, 347f, 4 25
clue: Leitfaden
co-: mitcognition, cognize: Erkenntnis,
erkennen
But cf. take cognizance (Kenntnis
nehnen, Kenntnis nahme)
(ftn. H. 25)
(See know, knowledge.)
come across: vorfinden, vorfindlich
(fin. H. 135)
*come along: ankommen, ankünftig
H. 242, 254, 330, 341f, 382, 389,
4 22f,427

Index of English Expressions
come along~ont.
(Note: this List also iru:ludes the passages
in which 'ankommen' and'ankünfiig',
etc. have heen translated as 'come on'
or 'oru:oming'.)
come back: *zurückkommen
(fin. H. 329, 383)
H. 76,284,326,339,341,343, 347f,
360,366,368,385,391,396,4°9,
422
come before us: vorkommen
(fin. H. 106)
H.106
come down: überkommen, überliefem
(fin. H. 12, 383)
tcome on: ankommen, ankünftig
(See 'come along'.)
tcome to owe: schuldig werden
(ftn. H. 283, 287)
H. 282, 286, 288
tcome towards: zukommen, *Zukunft, zukünftig
(fin· H. 3 25, 329)
H. 325f, 329f, 336f, 341, 343, 347,
'365, 395
common: gemein
But cf. common sense.
'c.' interest: H. 174
c.reason:H.4, 23 (lran~
c. understanding (Verstand): H.
182, 334, 220
'c.' world: H. 64
tcommon sense: *Verstiindigkeit
H. 147,260,269,288,292-294,296,
299, 309, 3 11f, 3 15, 329, 342,
38 7f, 395, 4 06, 4 22
communication: Mitteilung; *Kommunikation (H. 398f)
(dj. H. 155, 162, 168)
H. 32, 155-157, 160, 162f, 168f, 224,
272, 274, 363, 384
compare, comparison: *vergleichen;
abheben (contrast, bring out;
etc.); zusammenstellen; etc.
vergleichen: H. 52, 131, 166, 178,
218, 399
tcompetence: kônnen (*potentiality;
can; be able)
H.143
comport: verhalten
(fin. H. 4, 124)
tcompute: *errechnen: *rechnerisch
H. 48, 105, 264, 388, 390
conceal: verdecken, verhüllen

53 1

conceive, concept, conception: begreifen, Begriff, Begriffiichkeit;
etc.
(fin. H. 150, 433)
H. 3f, 7, 9f, 32, 150, 157, 180, 310,
349, 36 3, 393,433-435 (Hegel), et
passim
concern: besorgen
(fin. H. 57)
conclude: schliessen; abschliessen; etc.
(fin. H. 75, 330)
tconcrete, concreteness: *konkret,
*Konkretion
H. 1,7,9, 18f, 26, 32, 34, 36, 39, 43,
52, 78f, 82f, 12 9, 13 1, 133, 140,
167, 178, 184, 187f, 19 1f, 194,
2°9,229- 234, 25 1f, 255, 279, 300,
3°2,311,335,366,382,393-396,
398, 399 n . xiv, 431, 432 n. xxx,
435
confirm: *bewahren, verfestigen (H.
100)
(4[. H. 218)
connectedness, connection: Zusammenhang
The c. of Dasein's life from birth to
death: H. 373-390
(See also 35rJ, et passim, and entry for
'eontext'.)
conscience: *Gewissen
(fin. H. 291) (4[. H. 269,271,277>
289, 300)
H. 234, 268-27°, 27°-272 (Section
55), 272-274 (Section 56), 274280 (Section 57), 286, 288,
289- 295 (Section 59), 295-301
(Section 60),3°7, 3 10f, 317,372,
385, 403 (Torek)
bad conscience: H. 279, 290-293
call of conscience: 269-274 (Section
56), 274-280 (Section 57), 288f,
3°7,3 17
evil conscience: H. 209
good conscience: H. 279, 281, 288,
29°-293
public conscience: H. 278,403 (Torek)
universal conscience: H. 278
voice of conscience: H. 268f, 271,
275, 278, 280, 29°-29 2, 294, 300
wanting to have a conscience
(4[. H. 270, 289, 295f)
H. 234, 27of, 288f, 292, 295f, 300,
305,30 7,309f
world conscience: H. 278

53 2

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

consciousness: Bewusstsein (mind H.
50 ,246 )
c. of God: H. 269
c. of guilt: H. 28 l, 286
c. ofReality: H. 211f
c. oftruth: H. 216
intentionality of c. : H. 363 n. xxiii
reification of c.: H. 46, 114, 437
transcending of c.: H. 201 ff
Dilthey: H. 205 n, xv, 209
Hegel: H. 435, 437
Husserl: H. 47 n. ii
Kant: H. 203, 319
Torck: H. 40lf
See also H. 49, 62, 115, 218, 229,
265,278
consider: besinnen; betrachten (observe; study; contemplate H.
213); ansprechen; etc.
(fin. H. 15)
considerateness: Rücksicht
(fin. H. 123)
H. 123, 125, 131, 146
consist: bestehen; etc.
(fin. H. 303)
fconsole: *trôsten
H.253 f
fconspicuous: *auff'allig, *auffallend
(ftn. H. 74)
H. 46, 71, 73-75, 8of, 104, 107, II l,
121, 126, 157, 253, 274, 354f,
37°
(Note: ail references for 'inconspieuous'
are included here.)
constant: standig; *konstant (H. 416)
(fin. H. 117, 128,291,3°3,322,332,
375)
constancy, in-constancy, and nonSelf-constancy of the Self: H.
117, 322f, 33 2, 375, 390, 410
Descartes on the constancy of corporeal
Things, etc.: H. 92, 96
c. presence-at-hand: H. 96
c. readiness-to-hand: H. 103
the closest c. of Dasein: H. 128
the primordial c. ofexistence: H. 340
c. ahead-of-itself: H. 337
c. Being-guilty: H. 305
c. certainty: H. 308
c. resoluteness: H. 391
inconstancy, in-constancy: H. 128,
336f,390f
et passim
Constitution: *Konstitution
(fin. H. 8)

constitution, constitutive state: Verrassung
(ftn. H. 8)
constitute, constitutive, constituent:
*konstituieren,
*konstitutiv,
Verfassungs-;
*konstituens;
ausmachen (make up, go to make
up, etc.)
construct, constructive, construe: *konstruieren, *Konstruktion, *konstruktiv; bauen; etc.)
*konstruieren, *Konstruktion, *konstruktiv; H. 1l, 16, 28, 33, 36, 43,
50 n. x, 61, 109, 197, 206, 260,
302f, 375, 378, 399f, 427 n. xiii,
435
fconsume: *verzehren
H·43 1
content: Bestand; *Gehalt; *Inhalt;
etc.
(fin. H. 303)
context: Zusammenhang
(See also connectedness.)
fcontingency: *Kontingenz
H.143
continue: *fortlaufen; *fortgehen;
bleiben; etc.
But cf. Continuity, Continuous:
Kontinuitiit, kontinuierlich
(fin. H. 423)
H. 409f, 423
fcontinuity, continuous: *Stetigkeit,
*stetig
(fin. H. 423)
H·4 2 3f
fcontradiction, principle of: *Satz
vom Widerspruch
H.226
fconviction: *Überzeugung
(fin. H. 256)
H. 116,256
fcopula: *Copula, *Kopula
H. 159f, 349, 360
fcorporeal-Thing: *Korperding
H. 54, 56, 90-92, 97, 106f, 117, 238,
361 ,368
f corpse: *Leiche
H.238
feorruption: *Verderbnis
H.179 f
eount: zahlen (number H. 413); etc.
H. 125, 420f
(Note: other derivatives of 'Zahl' are
usually translated in other ways.)

counter-: GegenBut cf. eounter-thrust (Rückschlag);
run counter to: (widerstreiten H.

71 ).
fthe 'counter to': *das "Gegen"
H.21O
course: Gang; *Lauf; *Ablauf, *ablaufen; Verlauf, verlaufen; etc.
(fin. H. 243)
course of time: *Lauf der Zeit (H.
380, 422); "'mit der Zeit (H.
328 )
(See also run its course.)
cover up: verdeeken
(dj. H. 36)
fcowardliness: *Feigheit
H. 254, 266
fcraving: *Gier
(fin. H. 346)
H. 346f
critical, criticism, critique: *kritisch,
*Kritik
critical epistemology etc. : H. 156, 206
critical fumtion of the conscience: H.
279, 288, 290, 294
Hartmann's critical realism: H. 208,
n. xvi
Nietz,rche on critical historiology: H.
396f
et passim
culture: *Kultur
H. 21, 51f, 167, 176, 178,379, 395f
fcumulation: *Anhâufung
H. 242, 328f
fcuriosity: *Neugier
(fin· H. 346, 347) (dj. H. 170, 172f,
346)
H. 134, 170-173 (Section 36), 174f,
177f, 180, 222, 27 1, 273, 277,
3 10, 346-348
current: jeweilig
fdamage: *Beschiidigung; *Schaden
(H. 272, n. vi)
H. 73f, 354f
Dasein: *Dasein
(fin. H. 7, 25, 41, 58, 63, 184)
(dj. H. 1If, 25, 42, 52, 54, 57, 85-87,
113f, 119, 121, 128f, 133, 143f,
203, 210, 221, 231, 249f, 259f,
284f, 298, 323, 332, 381, 412,
433, et passim)
Dasein-with: *Mitdasein
H. 114, 116, 117-125 (Section 26),
137, 140, 142, 162f, 168, 170,

533

176, 18 7, 193, 239, 272, 297
fdating, datability: *datieren, *Datierbarkeit
H. 407-418, 422-424, 427
day: *Tag; etc.
H. 7 1, 179, 370f, 409, 412f, 415
dealings: *Umgang, umgehen
(fin. H. 65, 66)
H. 66-70, 79, 102, 104, 106f, 121,
149,352-355,358,364,412,42q
death: *Tod
(dj. H. 250, 258f)
H. 104, 198, 233f, 237-241 (Section 47), 242, 246-249 (Section
49), 249-252 (Section 50), 302,
306 -308, 3 11 , 3 17, 3 29, 345,
37 2-374, 382 -38 7, 390, 4 24f
Being towards death: (See Being
towards.)
fcase of death: *Todesfall
H. 252-254, 257, 264
tfreedom for death: H. 384f
tfreedom towards death: H. 266
tthinking about death:.H. 254,258,
261,3°9
fdebt: Sehuld
H. 242, 281-283
fthe deceased: *der Verstorbene
H.238f
deception: Tauschung (delusion)
H. 33, 38, 146, 169
decide: *entscheiden, besehliessen (H.
299)
(fin. H. 299, 300)
H. 12, 42, 107, 127, 177, 223, 228,
259, 268, 396
fdeduce, deductive: *deduzieren,
*deduktiv; schliessen (H. 4)
H.8, 11,36, 182,242,289,301, 314,
340, 367, 377
fdeficient: *defizient
(ftn. H. 20)
H. 20, 57,61,75, 104, 120f, 123-125,
336, 35 2, 355
define, definition: bestimmen; umgrenzen (delimit, etc.); *Definition,
*definieren; etc.
definite character
(See give a definite character.)
deformalize: *entformalisieren
H. 35, 24 1
deliberation: *Überlegung
H. 187,359-361
fdeliver over: *überantworten
(fin. H. 21)

534

deliver over--cont.
H. 21, 42, 134, 144, 148, 167, 173,
188f, 192, 251f, 254, 259, 276,
284, 364, 383, 396
tdelusion: Tauschung (deception)
H. 62, 138,274tdemise: *Ableben
(fin. H. 247)
H. 247, 251, 254, 257-259, 261
demonstrate: *ausweisen; erweisen
(prove, turn out); nachweisen;
demonstrieren (illustrate)
(ftn. H. 53)
depersonalization: *Entpersonalisierung

H·48

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

tdepression: *Gedrücktheit
H·342
tdeprive of its character as present:
*Entgegenwartigung
H. 39 1, 397
tdeprive of its theological character:
*enttheologisieren
H·49
tdeprive of its worldhood: *Entweltlichung
H. 65, 75,1 12f, derive,derivation, dederivation: *abkünftig; *ableiten, *abgeleitet; *Derivat, *Derivation; Herkunft (origin); etc.
(fin. H. 329)
d. cMracter of assertion: H. 133, 153160 (Section 33)
d. sense of 'certainry': H. 256
d. conception of guilt: H. 287
d. conception oftime: H. 326, 329-331
d. conception oftruth: H. 214, 219-226
(Section 44b), 256
d. kinds ofunderstanding: H. 143, 147,
152, 160
underived cMracter of Being: H. 4, 8
underived character of care: H. 182,318
history as derivation (Herkunft) from
the past: H. 378
et passim
tdesever: entfernen
(fin. H. 105) (dj. H. 105)
H. 27, 103, 105-111, 120, 132, 136,
147, 167, 17 2, 279, 293, 299,
335, 361 , 368f, 370, 396
(Note: this List also includes ail the
passages in which 'ent-JeTTIeTl' has
been translatedas 'de-sever' etc., or in
which 'entfeTTleTl' has been translated
as 'remove', etc.

tde-sever: *ent-fernen
(See entryfor 'tksever.')
tdesperation: *Verzweiflung
H. 229, 345
tdestiny: Geschick
But cf. destine (bestimmen, H. 15,
344)
(fin. H. 384) (dj. H. 384)
H. 56, 384-386, 394
tdestruction, destroy: *Destruktion,
*destruieren; *zerstoren (H. 152)
H. 19-27 (Section 6), 31, 39, Sg, 392
t Determine: *determinieren
H. 241, 298, 362, 368
determine: bestimmen
(fin. H. 344)
tdetrimentality: *Abtraglichkeit
H. 83, 140f, 144, 185f, 341
devote, devotedness: *hingeben,
*Hingabe; etc.
t*hingeben, *Hingabe: H. 136, 199,
347,354
tdiaeresis: *Diairesis
H.159
tdialectic: *Dialektik
H. 22, 25, 215, 229, 286, 3°1, 429f,
432, 432 n. xxx
die: *sterben
(dj. H. 247, 251)
H. 238-241, 245, 247-255, 257,
259
t'one dies': "man stirbt"
H.253- 255
tdie away: *absterben; *ersterben
H. 173f
differentiate: unterscheiden; *differenzieren, *Differenz
But cf. undifferentiated, without
differentiation (indifferent) (See
entry for 'Indifferent'.)
(fin. H. 429)
unterscheiden: H. 429f, 433-435
tdifferenzieren, *Differenz: H. 43,
50, 77, 119, 324, 396, 399f, 403
tdim down: *abblenden
H. 138, 155, 189, 195,265
dimension: *Dimension
H. 103, 110, 112, et passim
direct (adj.): *direkt; etc.
direct (verb): richten; ausrichten
(ftn. H. 102)
richten: H. 62, 137, 181, 287, 411
et passim
ausrichten: H. 79, 108-110,368

direction: Richtung; etc.
(fin. 102)
H. 71, 79, 102f, 108-III, et passim
tdirectional, directionality: ausgerichtet, *Ausrichtung
(fin. H. 102)
H. 79,102,105,108-111,120,132,
157, 299, 335, 368f
disappear: versçhwinden (vanish)
H. 105, 244f, 25 1, 342, 357, 375, 379,

389

tdisavowal: *Widerruf
(fin. H. 386)
H·386
tdisburden: *entlasten
disclose: terschliessen
(ftn. H. 75, 151,297,298,3°0,315)
(dj. H. 75, 175, 180,220, 269, 334f)
(Sec Sections 44, 68, et passim.)
discourse: Rede, reden
(fin. H. 25, 160) (dj. H. 32, 161f)
H. 25, 32, 34, 133f, 160-167 (Section
34), 168f, 173f, 180, 187f, 220,
223, 269- 273, 277, 295f, 335,
346, 349f (Section 68d) , 4064°8, 4 16, 425
(Note: this List inclutks the more important passages in which the
alternative translation 'ta/k' has
been used.)
discover: entdecken
(fin· H. 33)
(Note: sec also 'uncover'.)
discriminate; unterscheiden; *Diskrimen
(fin. H. 429)
discuss: *besprechen; erortern; *Diskussion, *diskutieren; etc. addressing and discussing: ansprechen und besprechen
(ftn. H. 34)
H. 25, 34, W, 59, 62, 406, 408
tdisguise: verstellen
H. 35f, 58, 124, 129, 132, 175, 191,
222, 274, 295, 3°2, 326
tdisperse: zerstreuen
H. 56, 67, 129, 172, 273, 310, 338,
347,37 1,389f
(Note: this List also includes ail passages
in which '::;erstreuen' is translated as
'distract'.)
tdissect: *zergliedern
H. 178,2°9,273
tdistance, distant: *Abstand

535

But cf. distance-senses (Fernsinne
H. 107).
(ftn. H. 105)
H. 102, 105-108, 122, 126, 269, 361,
369, 381
tdistantial, distantiality: *abstandmiissig, *Abstandigkeit
H. 1°7, 126-128
distinctive: ausgezeichnet, auszeichnen
(special; distinguish; etc.)
But cf. distinguish (abgrenzen, auszeichnen, scheiden, trennen) ;
distinct (verschieden, deutlich,
Unterschied); distinction (Ab. gren zung, Unterschied, scheiden).
distract: zerstreuen
(Note: sec entryfor 'disperse'.)
tdivert: verlegen
H. 146, 165,201,206,222,259
tdownward plunge: *Absturz
H. 178
tdread: *Grauen
(fin. H. 182; cf. H. 190 n. iv.)
H.142
tdrive (noun): Trieb
H. 194, 210f
tdue on account: *etwas am Brett
haben
H.281
tdumh: *stumm
H. i64, 296
tduration: *Dauer
H. 106,432-3 n. xxx
the 'during': das "wiihrend"
But cf. endure (*wahren, etc.) ;
duration (*Dauer).
H. 409 (Cf. also H. 413.)
tdwell, dwelling: aufhalten, Aufenthalt
(fin. H. 61)
H. 54, 61-63, 69, 75,80,88, 107, 119,
124, 164, 173, 189, 261, 347,
352, 388, 422
easy: leicht
(fin: H. 360)
H·3 60
ecstasis, ecstatical: *Ekstase, *ekstatisch
(fin. H. 329, 338) (dj. H. 329, 365)
H. 329-331, 337ff,passim
telate: heben (raise, etc.)
H. 134f. 345
element: *Element; etc.
H. 46, 181, 196, 334, 403
e1emental: *e1ementar

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

temanate: ausstrahlen (radiate)
H. 30, 14°,35°
(Note: this List includes aU passages in
whith 'ausstrahlen' appears.)
tempathy: *Einfühlung
H.12#
tempirical: *empirisch
H. 3of, 50, 162,229, 257f, 269, 321,

367

empty: leer (vacuity, H. 60)
encounter: *begegnen
(fin· H. 3 1 , 44, 32 9)
end: Ende, enden
H. 233-238, 241-246 (Section 48),
249f, 259, 264, 305, 329, 373f,
424,4 26
Being-at-an-end: *Zu-Ende-sein
(fin. H. 234)
H. 234, 237, 245f, 305
Being towards the end: *Sein-:lJwnEnde
(Su Being towards.)
tcome to an end: *Zu-Ende-kommen
H.238-242
endless: *endlos
H. 33of, 348, 384, 424, 426
tendanger:*gefahrden
H. 141, 282, 356
tendure: *wiihren; *fortwiihrend; *immerwiihrend
But cf. duration (*Dauer); the
'during' (*das "wiihrend")
H. 96, 128, 409
tentangle: *verfangen, *verflinglich
But cf. disentangle (auswickeln,H.
241; entwirren)
H.67, 173, 178, IBo, 346-348
tenter into: *hereinstehen
But cf. the transitive verb 'enter' ('kommen in •• .')
H. 152, 248, 255, 258, 302
entity: Seiendes; seiend (H. 130)
(ftn. H. 1,3, 7, Il)
environment: *Umwelt
(fin. H. 65)
H. 57f, 66-88 (l, III A), 89, 101-113
(l, III C), et passim
tenvisage: *vergegenwiirtigen
(ftn. H. 359)
H. 34, 55, 248, 303, 359, 393
tcpistemology: Erkenntnistheorie
H. 10, 59, 156, 183, 206-210, 213216,375,4° 1
(Note: this List includes aU passages in
which 'Erkmntnistheorie' kas been

translated as 'theory of knowkdge'.
See also 'cognition', 'know.')
tequality: Gleichheit (sameness, H.
118)
But cf. equiprimordial, with equal
primordiality (gleichursprünglich)
H. 216, 434
tequanimity: *Gleichmut
(fin· H. 134)
H. 134,345
equipment, item of equipment: *Zeug
(fin. H. 68, 74)
H. 68ff, et passim
equiprimordial, with equal primordiality: *gleichursprünglich
tEssence: *Essenz
(fin. H. I l 7)
H. 117, 233, 318
essence, essential: Wesen, *wesenhaft,
*wesenùich
(fin. H. 117)
H. 12,42, 48f, 214,231, 298,etpassim
tEssential: *essentiell
(ftn. H. 117)
H·1I7
testablishing of signs: *Zeichenstiftung
H.80f
estimation: schiitzen (esteem, assess);
abschiitzen (assess)
H. 105f, 369
teternal, eternity: *ewig, *Ewigkeit
H. 18, 106,227, 229, 338 n. iii, 371,
423, 437 n. xiii, 34 1
*ethics: *Ethik
H. 16, 291 n. viii (Scheler), 294, 316,
320f n. xix (Scheler), 402
(Torck)
ethnology
H. 51, 51 ftn. xi, 247
(Su also culture, primitive.)
teudaemonism: *Eudaimonismus
H.293
tevade: ausweichen (give way, H. 78f)
H.93f, 135f, 139,213,254-260,264,
322 , 342f, 37 1, 39 1, 425
tevent: *Begebenheit; *Ereignis
*Begebenheit: H. 240, 277, 280, 310,
379,384,395,4 10f
*Ereignis: H. 152, 250, 253f, 257,
273, 284, 290, 378f, 382 , 389
everyday, everydayness: *alltiiglich,
*Alltaglichkeit; *Alltag (H. 258,
345, 37of)
But cf. every day (aile Tage, H. 370)

everyday--eon~

(fin. H. 16) (df. H. 43 f, 181, 332,
37°-372)
H. 16f, 43f, 5of, 117-125 (Section 26),
126- 13° (Section 27), 166-180
(l, V B), 181, 233-235, 252-255
(Section 51), 255-260 (Section
52), 332-335, 370-372 (Section
71), et passim
tEveryman: *Jedermann
H. 362 , 37°,411,413,416
everyone: *jedermann; etc.
H. 4 13, 4 17, 425
teverywhere and nowhere: *überall
und nirgends
H. 173, 177,3.47
tevil (noun): *Ubel
H. 14 1, 248, 34 1f
tevil (adj.): *bOse
H. 286f, 29of
texact (verb): zumuten (impose upon,
H. 39); *sich riichen (exact a
penalty, H. 174)
H. 266, 285, 305, 3°7-310, 322
exhibit: aufweisen; aufzeigen; herausstellen (set Forth, etc.)
(fin· H. 34, 53)
exist, existence, existent: *existieren,
*Existenz, *existent
(fin. H. 303, 329) (df. H. 12f, 42, 53,
231-233, 313f, etc.)
existential, existentiality: *existenzial
(adj.), *Existenzialitiit
(ftn. H. 12) (df. H. 12, 327)
H. 12f, 16, 20,38,41, etc. and Sections
Il, 25, 29-34, 42, 45, 49, 50, 52,
53, 59, 60, 67, 72, 76, 82, 83,
et passim
*existentiak: *Existenzial (noun)
(df. H. 44)
H.4#,54-57,64, 105, III, 121, 129f,
134, 143f, 148, 15of, 160, 165,
199f, 226, 24 2, 297, 3 11 , 336
existentiell: *existenziell
(ftn. H. 12) (df. H. 12)
Sections 54, 62, et passim
texpect: *erwarten
(df. H. 262, 337)
H. 119, 156, 195,2°5,246,248, 261f,
274f, 294, 337, 339, 34 1-343,
345, 353, 355
tExperience: *erleben, *Erlebnis
(ftn. H. 46)
H. 46-49, 114, 119, 130, 136, 181,
194, 21 4, 247, 25 1, 265, 269,

537

279, 290-293, 340, 344, 355,
373f, 387f, 39of, 400
experience: erfahren
(ftn. H. 46)
explain: erkliiren (declare, etc.); explizieren, Explikation (explicate); deuten (point to); etc.
deuten
(ftn. H. 87)
erkliiren
(df. H. 336)
explicit: *ausdrücklich; *explizit
(ftn. H. 149)
express,
expression: *ausdrücken,
*Ausdruck; aussprechen; etc.
(fin. H. 149, 167,224,4°8)
aussprechen:
H. 149, 155, 161-165, 167f, 223-225,
27 1, 4°6-411, 414, 417, 42 If,
et passim
textend, extension: ausdehnen, Ausdehnung (a high degree, H.
195); sich erstrecken
But cf. extensive (weitgehend,
weitliiufig); extent (Weite,
Reichweite, Tragweite, inwieweit, inwiefem, sofem, etc.)
ausdehnen, Ausdenhnung: H. 54,
68, 90, 101, 112, 368, 427 n. xv
tsich erstrecken: H. 173, 188,239
textemal world: *Aussenwelt
H. 201, 202-208 (Section 43a), 2IJ,
273
face to face with: vor (with accusatilll);
das Wovor
(But cf. in the face of (vor, with
dative)
(ftn. H. 184, 327)
H. 184, 188,224,227,255, 265f, 276,
288
Fact: *Faktum
(fin. H. 56)
H. 5, 18, 56, 66, 79, 148, 152, 168,
179, 190, 225, 254, 268f, 276,
287,328,371,382,387,392f,428
fact: *Tatsache; etc.
(ftn. H. 56)
*Tatsache: H. 56, 179, 229, 254,
257f, 268f, 290, 293, 328, 362,
394f, 398, 404, et passim
(Note: the word 'fact' kas been used
informally in translating several
other expressions. Our List ofpassages
is by no means complete, but

Being and Time
fact--eont.
includes only sorne in which it is
perhaps ofparticular interest that the
word 'Tatsache' has been used.)
factical :*faktisch
(fin. H. 7, 56)
(H. 145f, 179, 192, 221, 229, 251f,
256f, 259f, 263f, 266, 269, 276,
et passim
tfacticity: *Faktizitiit
(fin. H. 7, 56, 135)
H. 56, 59, 72 n. i, 120, 128, 135, 145,
179, 181, 19°- 193,222,229,23 1,
250, 252, 275f, 284, 298, 3 14,
3 16, 328, 348, 350, 404
factual, factuality: *tatsachlich, *Tatslichlichkeit
But cf. factual circumstance (Sachverhalt,H.264f);factualscience
(Tatsachenwissenschaft, H. 362)
(fin. H. 7, 56, 135) (df. H. 56, 394)
H. 56, 135,276, 315, 394, et passim
fail to hear: *überhoren
(ftn. H. 271)
H. 271, 279f, 296
failure to stand by itself: *Unselbstiindigkeit
(fin. H. 117, 322)
H. 117, 128
tfaith: *Glaube, glauben, (think; believe, etc.)
H. 10, 180, 190 n. iv, 205f
faIl: verfallen (deteriorate, H. 22, 36);
fallen; Verfall (H. 378)
But cf. fall short (zurückbleiben;
nicht ins Ziel bringen).
(ftn. H. 21, 134, 175, 300, 428) (df.
H. 175, 180, 254, 346f, 369)
verfallen: H. 21, 134f, 139, 166-180
(l, V B; esp. Section 38); 346349 (Section 68c), et passim
fallen: H. 134,4°5,428,433-436
faIse: *falsch
But cf. faIsify (verfalschen)
H. 33, 215, 226f, 393
familiar: vertraut; bekannt (weIl
known; acquaintance)
tfarness: Ferne
(ftn. H. 105)
H. 105, 107f, 140, 172
(Note: this includes aU passages in
which 'Perne' occurs.)
tfascinated: *benommen
(fin· H. 344)
H. 61, 76, 113, 176, 27 1, 344)

tfate, *Schicksal
But cf. fatal (fatal, H. 368)
(fin. H. 384) (4/: H. 385, 386)
H. 166,384-392, 394f, 4 10, 435
tfear: *Furcht, *fürchten
(fin. H. 141) (4/: H. 14off, 189,
342,3W
H. 133, 140-142 (Section 30), 182,
185f, 189, 190 n. iv, 25 1, 254,
266, 341-345
tfear about: *fürchten um
H. 141f, 341
tfear for: *fürchten für
H. 141f.
tfearful: *furchtsam
H. 14 1f, 345
tfearlessness: *Furchùosigkeit
H.137
tfearsome: *furchtbar
H. 14°-142, 185f
tfeeling: *Gefühl
But cf. feel (fühlen); feel by touch
(tasten, betasten)
H. 109, 138f, 142, 249 n. vi, 271,
342,4°0 (Torck)
tfill in: erfüllen
(ftn. H. 151)
H. 151, 192,320 n. xix, 326, 343
tfill up: *auffüllen (242f, 374); *ausfüllen (103, 368)
find oneself: sich finden, sich befinden,
Befindlichkeit (H. 328)
(ftn. H. 134, 135, 137,328)
sich finden: H. 119, 128f, 135, 144,
268,27 1, 328, 340
sich befinden: H. 135, 180, 188,34°,
346
(Note: the verb 'find' has been used
informally to translate 'finden' and
many other expressions, of which the
most important is 'befindlich'-'to
be found'.)
tfinite: *endlich
H. 93, 264, 329-331, 348, 384-386,
4 13,424f
tfirst instance: See in the first instance.
tflee: *fliehen, *Flucht; flüchtig (fleeting, fugitive)
(fin. H. 184)
H.44, 134f, 184-186, 189, 192f, 25 1255, 258-260, 276, 278, 310,
322 , 340, 348, 390, 425
(Note: this List also incluries the passages
in which 'flüchtig' is translated as
jleeting' or 'fugitive'.)

Index of English Expressions
fleeting: *flüchtig
(Seeflee.)
.
for the most part: zumelSt
(fin. H. 16) (df. H. 370)
the "for-the-sake-of-which": das Worumwillen
H. 84, 86-88, Il l, 123, 129, 143,
145-147, 181, 191-194, 228,
236, 297f, 327, 333f, 337, 347,
359, 364f, 4 12, 4 14
(Note: this List aIso includes ail the chief
passages in which 'umwillen' is
transLated as 'for the sake of'.)
the "for-which": das Wofür (H. 83f);
das Wozu (H. 414)
(fin. H. 4 14)
tforbearance: *Nachsicht
(ftn. H. 123)
H. 123
tfore-conception: Vorgriff
(fin. H. 150, 327)
H. 15of, 153, 157, 232, 3 11
(Note: this List also includes ail passages
in which 'Vorgriff' is transLated as
'something we grasp in advance'.)
tfore-having: Vorhabe
(fin. H. 150, 327)
H. 15of, 153, 157f, 2320-234, 236, 268,
290, 3 1l, 316, 323, 372
(Note: this List aIso incluries ail passages
in which 'Vorhabe' is transLated as
'sornething we have in advance'.)
tfore-sight: Vorsicht
(ftn. H. 15°,527)
H. Bo, 15of, 153, 156-158, 232f, 257,
31 l, 316
(Note: this List also includes ail passages
in which 'vorsichtig' occurs, and ail
those in which 'Vorsicht' is transLated as 'something we see in
advance'.)
ffore-structure: *Vor-Struktur
(ftn. H. 327)
H. 151-153
forget: *vergessen
(df. H. 21 9, 339)
!
H. 44, 62, 219, 262, 277, 292, 322,
339, 34 1-345, 347f, 350, 354,
36g, 388, 39 1, 406f, 409f, 4 24f,
et passim
fonn: *Form; *ausformen: Gestalt
(H. 158, 163); etc.
H. 31, 78, 103, III, 156, 163, 319,
366f, 41>0, et passim

539

(Note: the word 'form' has bem usedfreely
in translating many other expressions.
formaI: *formal
(Note: in Heidegger's usage this word is
to be thought of as roughly ,rynonymous with 'empty' and 'abstract'.
lts opposite is 'concrete', not 'informai'. Cf. H. 7, 27, 88, I47,
I59, 24 I , 248, 255, 277, 435,
et passim.)
formalism: *Formalismus
H. 9, 400
tformalize: *formalisieren
H. 22, 77f, 88, 147, 159, 208, 283,
43 2f
(Note: Set also 'deformaIi;;.e'.)
former occasion: See on that former
occasion.
forward: vor-; etc.
(fin. H. 29 1 )
forthwith: sogleich; sofort
H. 407, 421 , 424
found,
foundation:
*fundieren;
*Fundament; *fundamentieren;
*Grundlagenkrisis (H. 9)
But cf. fundamental (fundamental)
(ftn. H. 34, 6g)
Sections 13 (H. 59-62), 20 (H. 9295), ~ (H. 214-219), et passim
free (adj.), freedom: frei, *Freiheit;
-los (angsÙos, H. 258; sorglos,
H. 57, 192, 294)
(df. H. 285, 366, 384)
f. for authenticity or inauthenticity:
H. 188, 19 1, 195,232,344
f. for Being-guilty: H. 288
f. for the calI of conscience: H. 287
f. for care: H. 122
f. for death: H. 264, 266, 384f
f. for freedom of choice: H. 188
f. for oneself: H. 122
f. for possibilities: H. 191, 193, 199,
264, 285, 3 12, 344
f. for one's ownmost potentiality-forBeing:H. 144, 191
f. for repetition : H. 385
free (verb): *freigeben, *Freigabe
(fin. H. 83)
H. 83-86, 104, 11of, 118, 120-123,
129, 14 1, 144, 227, 264, 297f,
3 10, 3 13, 343, 363
tfree-floating: freischwebend (soaring,
H·9)
H. 19,28,36, 123,144,156,272,276,
279,2g8, 309,3 25,339,388,424

Being and Time

54°

tfruit
H.243f
fugitive: flüchtig
(Su flee.)
fulfill: vollenden (complete); erfüllen;
genügen (H. 31)
(fin. H. 244)
H.244
function: Funktion; fungieren; etc.
H. 88, et passim
fundamental: *fundamental
f. analysis: H. 39,41, 131, 181, 184,
213, 230, 231-235 (Section 45),

360

f. ontology: H. 13f, 37, 13 1, 154,
182f, 194, 196, 200-202, 213,
232, 268, 301, 310, 3 16, 377,
403, 405f, 436-437 (Section 83)
tfurther retelling: *weitersagen
H. 155, 169,277
tfuture, futural: *Zukunft, zukünftig
(fin. H. 325, 329) (dj. H. 325)
H. 20, 141, 325-33°, 336-348, 350,
360,365,378,381,385-387,391,
395-397,4 10, 423-427, 43 1
generation: *Generation
H. 20, 385, 385 n. viii
tgenesis: *Genesis
H. 171, 357f, 360-362 , 392, 406,
420-428 (Section 81)
genuine: *echt; *genuin
(fin. H. 5) (dj. Cf. H. 142, 146)
tgenus, generic: *Gattung
H. 3, 14,38,42,77, 128,433 (Hegel)
give a definite character: bestimmen
H. 154-8, 162
tgive oneself airs: *sich aufspreizen
(fin· H. Hof, 434
tgive to understand: *zu verstehen
geben
H. 148, 267, 269-271, 279f, 287, 296
given: gegeben
H. 36, 115f, 129, 265, et passim
go to make up: See make up
God: H. 10, 24, 28, 48f, 49 nn. vii, ix;
92f, 95, 190 n. iv, 199, 269, 275,
291, 427 n. xiii
(Note: see also 'theology'.)
good: *gut; Dutzendware (H. 71)
H. 29, 99, 199, 279, 281, 286, 288,
290-293, 38 3
tgossip: ·nachreden
H. I68f

tgrammar: *Grammatik
H. 165
grasp: fassen (take, etc.); erfassen
(*apprehend; comprehension,
H. 49); greifen; etc.
grasp in advance: *Vorgriif
(ftn. H. 150)
(Note: see fore-conception.)
Greeks
H. 25f, 33f, 39, 68, 165, 17of, 222,
225, 358, 378
ground (verb): gründen (base, basis);
begründen (establish, etc.); etc.
ground (noun): Grund (basis, reason,
bottom, etc.) ; Boden (basis,
soil, footing, etc.) ; etc.
H. 32, 34,152, et passim
groundless: *bodenlos
H. 168-170, 177f, et passim
tguilt, guilty: Schuld, schuldig
(fin. H. 280, 281, 287) (dj. H. 281283, 286, 305f)
H. 26gf, 279, 280-289 (Section 58),
290-293, 295-297, 301, 305-307,
306 n. ii, 31 l, 317, 325, 372,
382 ,385
thammer: *Hammer
H. 69f, 78, 83f, 109, 154, 157, 36of
band down: überliefem
(fin. H. 21, 383)
H. 21,166,379,383-387, 39of, 395
handle: *handhaben; handeln; behandeln (H. 34)
*handhaben: H. 109, 353, 355, 360,
368f
thandy: handlich
H. 73, 4 14, 4 18
thanker:*nachhângen
H.195
happen: geschehen; .Rückzeichen (H.
78,80)
(fin. H. 19)
H. 330, 376, 388 n., ix, 389, 395, 404,
426, et passim
(Su also 'histori;:;e'.)
hard, hardness: *hart, *Harte; *erschweren (H. 36o)
H. 91, 96f
have been, having been: gewesen,
*Gewesenheit; etc.
(fin. H. 326)
H. 326-329, 34°-346, 348, 350, 360,
365,381,385-387,391,395,427

Index of English Expressions
have been-eont.
thave-been-there: *da-gewesen
H. 38of, 385f, 393-397
t having-been-in-the-world: *In-derWelt-gewesen-sein
H·394
tbe-as-having-been: gewesen sein,
Gewesensein
H. 326, 328, 339f, 344
tin the process of having been:
gewesend
(fin. H. 326)
H. 326, 350, 385, 391, 396,410
thave before us: vorhaben
H. 149, 260, 279, 300
have a conscience: See conscience.
thave debts: *Schulden haben
H.281-283
thave due on account: *etwas am
Brett haben
H.281
'have' an environment: H. 57f
'have' a history: H. 378, 382, 417
have in advance: See fore-having.
thave meaning: *Sinn haben
H. 151, 154,324,361
have a mood: See mood.
thaving presence: *anwesend
(ftn. H. 326)
H. 326, 346, 359, 369, 389,4 17,423
thave responsibility: *Schuld haben
H.282
have something: Haben von etwas
H·35 I
have time: See time
have to be: zu sein haben
H. 12, 134
have to do: *zu tun haben
H. 48, 56, 61, 79, 125, 149, 158, 160,
172, 35 1
thaving the 'world': die "Welt" haben
H. 58
hear: hôren
(ftn. H. 164, 271, 284)
H. 33, 107, 155, 161, 163-165, 168,
174, 269, 27 1, 273-275, 277,
279-281, 284, 287, 292, 294296
thearken: ·horchen
H. 163f
thearsay: ·Hôrensagen
H. 155, 169, 173,224
heavy: schwer
(ftn. H. 36o)
H. 154, 157, 36of

54 1

the "here": das Hier
(dj. H. 369)
H. 107, 1I9f, 132, 186, 369,417
theritage: *Erbe, *Erbschaft
H. 383-386, 39of
thermeneutic, hermeneutical: *Hermeneutik, *hermeneutisch
(dj. H. 37f; 398 (Dilthey»)
h. ofBeing with one another: H. 138
h. of Dasein: H. 37f, 436
h. of Dasein's facticity: H. 72 n. i
h. of empathy H. 125
h. of the .\6yos H. 25
psychological hermeneutics: H. 398
hermeneutical "as": H. 158f, 223
h. discussion of the Cartesian ontology of the 'world': H. 89, 95101 (Section 21)
h. conditions etc.: H. 272 n. vi
h. Situation: H. 232f, 235, 304, 3103 15 (Section 63),397
thero: *Held
H. 371, 385
hide: bergen (lurk; harbour; etc.);
*verbergen; Versteck, verstecken (H. 124, 273)
H. 33, 36, 219, 222, et passim
thistorian: *Historiker
H. 152, 393f, 396
(Note: cf. also H. 4oojf.)
t Historical: historisch
(fin. H. 397)
H. 399-403 (rorck)
historical: historicality: tgeschichtlich,
Geschichts-, *Geschichtlichkeit
(ftn. H. 10) (dj. H. 375, 378, 381,
385f )
H. 10, 19-22, 38, 197, 234, 332f,
361f, 372-4°4 (II, V), 409f, 415,
417,417 n. v, 435
world-historical: weltgeschichtlich
(See entry below.)
thistoricism: *Historismus
H·39 6
thistoricity: *Historizitat
(fin. H. 10, 20)
H.20
historiology, historiological: Historie,
historisch
(dj. H. 375, 378, 392, 394, 396)
(fin. H. 10, 397)
H. 10, 20f, 38f, 45f, I52f, 235, 247,
332, 361 , 375-377, 379-382
(Section 73), 386, 389, 392-397
(Section 76), 398, 415, 418

542

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

fhistorize: geschehen
(fin. H. 19,37 1,384 (df. H. 375)
H. 19f, 37 1,375-378,378-382 (Secti0
73),383-390,392,404,413,43
(See also 'lw.jJJJen'.)
.
H"
fHIStOry: IStone
(fin. H. 397)
H. 399-403
history: Geschichte
(fin· H. 10, 19) (df. H. 10, 19,378,
379,388 ,39 1 )
h. of equipment, work, culture,
ideas: H. 395 .
h. of~e humane sCIC~nces: H. 398
h. ofhterature: H. 10,397.
h. ofontology: H. 19-26 (SectlOn 6),
39
h. ofphilosophy: H. 392
h. of the Present: H. 3 9 3 .
h. of problems: H. 10, 249 n. VI
h. of the sciences ofman, society, and
state: 1:1: 3g8
h. of the SplI'lt: H .. 395, 397
h. of the uncovermg of the tlpXa.l:
H.212
h. ofwhat-has-been-there: H. 395
h. of the word 'c~a': H. 199
h. of the word Àoyos: H. 32
h. of the word 'phenomenology': H.
28.
philosophy~fhIStOry:H'402 (TOf"Ck)
science ofHISt0I1': H. 375, 378, 404
(See als? 'histortology'.)
natural ~IStOry: H. 388 .
world-hIStOry: Weltgeschlchte
(See entry below.)
hav~g a ~tory: H. 378, 382 ,4 17
making h~tory: H. 378
Hegel on h~tory: H. 428, 434, 436
TOTck on hIStOry: H. 400 ff
.
Set' also H. 9f, 372-377 (SectIon
72), 378-382 (Section 73), 386,
399,417,418 n. v,426
hold: halten; gelten; etc.
(fin. H. 354)
fhold back: *sich enthalten; retardieren (H. 169)
(Jtn. H. 61)
H. 61, 357f, 393
(Note: the vtTb 'ent/w.lten' kas bem
translated in other ways.)
hold fast: festhalten
(fin. H. 354)
H. 177, 198, 355, et passim

6

fhold for true: *für wahr halten
(fin. H. 256)
f
hO:' f~~\::J;Jt~~ (keep open; steer
lear' etc)
c
, .
0
H·3 7f
hold itself in: *Ansichhalten; Sichdarin-halten (H. 87)
(fin. H. 75)
H. 75 80
(Note! the vtTb 'anhalten' kas been
translated in other ways.)
hold on to: halten
(Jtn. H. 347)
H. 338, 3#, 347, 349f
hold open: offen halten (keep open,
H. 16g)
H.307f
hold up: aufhalten; vorhalten (H. 266)
(Jtn. H. 354)
H 355
(Note: the rejlexive 'sich auflw.lten' is
a/ways translated as 'dwell'.)
hope: Hoffen, Hoffnung, erhoffen
H. 236, 345
.
horizon horizonal: *Horizont, *Hon~ontal

(fin. H. 1)
horizonal schema: *horizontale
Schema
(df. H. 365)
the "how": das Wie
H.27 34f: 218f. 224,348,370
fthe 'ho:.v o~e is': *das "wie einem ist"
H. 134, 188, 340
human: Mensch (man), *menschlich,
*Menschen(See man.)
fhuman-Thing: *Menschending
H.60, 120
fhumane sciences: *Geisteswissenschaften
H. 10, 38, 46, 129, 376, 397-399
the "1": das Ich
(df. H. 116,318,322,332)
the "1" as subject: H. 22, 317, 3 22
the "1" as the "who" of Dasein:
H. 114f, 129,267,313,317,322
the abstract "1": H. 401 (Torek)
the isolated "1": H. 116, 118, 179,
298
the pure "1": H. 229
the worldless "1": H. 3 16
fl-here: H. 119, 132

543

fiInmanent: *immanent
the ''l''---f:ont.
fI-hood: *Ichheit
H.9, 136, 1#, 181,216,326
immediate: *unmittelbar
H. 116, 318, 323
fI-Thing: *Ichding
H. 3, 39 1, 430, 433-435 (Hegel), et
passim
H. 107, 119
the "1 am": das "ich bin"
fimmobilize: stilliegen (Jtn. H. 371)
(Jtn. H. 54)
H. 371
fimmortal: *unsterblich
H.54, 129,211,297,321,381
(See also H. 278,317)
H. 199, 247f, 320 n. xix
fI am-as-having-been: ich bin- fimpend: bevorstehen, Bevorstand
gewesen
(fin. H. 250)
H. 326, 328
H. 250f, 257, 264, 353
(Note: this list includes aIl passages in
(See also H. 339)
which these expressions are trans1 am concemed: H. 322
lated as 'stand befOTe'.)
1 take action: H. 319
iInpossibility: *Unmoglichkeit
1 think: H. 24, 319-321,427
the givenness of the "1": H. 46,
H.250,255,262,265,329,342etpassim
in: in; etc.
115f, 129, 265
the not-I: H. 116, 433
(df. H. 54)
(See also Being-in.)
saying "1": H. 318f, 321-323
in advance: im Vorhinein; etc.
Descartes on the "1": H. 46, 95, 98
(See also: grasp in a., have in a., see
Hegel on the "1": H. 433f
in a., take in a.)
Humboldt on the "1": H. 119
Kant on the "1": H. 109, 318-321, fthe "in-between" : *das Inzwischen
320 n. xix
H·40 9
the "1" and the Sdf: H. 129f, 317-23, in the face of: vor
(See face to face with.)
348
in the first instance: zunachst
idea: *Idee; etc.
(fin. H. 6)
H. 34, 226, 281, 434 (Hegel), et
in itself, in themsdves: an sich, an
passim
ihm sdbst, an ihnen selbst
ideal: *Ideal, *ideal, *ideell
H. 156, 216f, 229, 266, 280, 285, 300,
(fin. H. 75)
H. 16, 28, 30f, 69, 71, 74-76, 87-90,
310, 430 (Hegel), 431 (Hegel),
94, 106, 112, 116, 118, 169, 191,
153
201f, 207, 209, 209 n. xvii, 212~
fidealism: *Idealismus
218, 227f, 264, 288, 329, 354,
H. 34, 183, 203f, 206-208, 321 n. xx
380, 400, 405, 4 19, 4 24-426, 435
identical: *identisch
(Note: this list also includes the passages
(Jtn. H. 114)
in which 'Being-in-itself' and 'Bting
H. 114, 130
-in-themselves' appear.)
fidle talk: *Gerede
in me: in mir
(fin. H. 25, 167) (df. H. 168f, 177)
H. 204-5 (Kant)
H. 134f, 165, 167-170 (Section 35),
173-175, 177, 180, 222, 252~ the "in-order-to" : das Um-zu
(fin. H. 65, 78)
255, 27 1, 277, 296, 346
H. 68f, 74, 78, 82, 86-88, 149, 192,
the 'if-then': das "wenn-so"
261, 355, 364f, 4 14
H·359
fin the present: *gegenwartig
fill-humour: *Missmut
H. 369, 378, 380
(Jtn. H. 134)
in time: in der Zeit
H.134
(See time.)
illumine, illuminate: erhellen; *erleu- the "in-which": das Wobei
chten; *einleuchten
H. 84-87, 202
H. 133 (erleuchten), 351 (Erhellung) in the world: *in der Welt
fIllusion: *Illusion
(Jtn. H. 13)
illusion: Schein
H. 53, 65

Being and Time

544

inappropriate
(Su appropriate.)
inauthentic: *uneigenùich
i. anxiety: H. 189
i. awaiting: H. 425
i. Being of Dasein: H. 43f, 53, 128,
175-178, 191, 193, 233, 268,
285, 304, 33 1, 335, 350, 390
i. Being-ahead-of-oneself: H. 195
i. Being-in-the-world: H. 179
i. Being-towards-death: H. 252, 259f,
264,373
i. Being-a-whole: H. 331
i. disclosedness: H. 325, 331
i. everydayness: H. 178
i. existence: H. 232, 328, 376, 387,
410, 4 25, 436
i. future: H. 337,343,347
i. having-been: H. 339, 345
i. historicality: H. 376, 387, 39of, 396
i. interpretation: H. 281, 331
i. possibilities of concern: H. 347
i. potentiality-for-Being-a-whole: H.
33 1
i. Present: H. 338, 347
i. Self: H. 181, 332
i. temporality: H. 326, 329, 331, 341,

42 4

i. "they": H. 179, 332
i. they-self: H. 181, 303
i. time: H. 329
i. understanding: H. 146, 148, 254,
326, 337-339
inconspicuous: *unaufHUlig
(See conspicuous.)
inconstancy: U nstandigkeit
(See constant.)
tincorruption: *Unverdorbenheit
H.180
tindebtedness; *Verschuldung
But cf. are indebted to (verdanken,
399 n. xiv)
H. 284, 287f, 290-293, 300, 306 n.
ii, 307
indefiniteness: U nbestimmtheit
of the call of conscience: H. 273f,
278f
of the caller: H. 274f, 280
of death and its "when": H. 253,
258-260, 263, 265, 308
of that in the face of which one is
anxious: H. 186f
of Dasein's potentiality-for-Being:
H. 298,308
of resoluteness: H. 298

of the Self to which the appeal is
made: H. 274
of the Self which is concernful: H.
322
of the understanding of Being: H. 5
of what Dasein finds itsdf alongside
in uncanniness: H. 188
of what one's drive and will are out
for: H. 210
tindetermmate immediate: *unbestimmte Unmittelbare
H.3 (Hegel)
indicate: anzeigen, Anzeige; zeigen;
*indizieren, *Indikation, Index
(fin. H. 77)
H. 77-82,215, et passim
t Indifferent, Indifference: indifferent,
Indifferenz
(ftn. H. 42)
H. 43, 53, 121, 12gf, 160, 169, 192,
194, 208f, 212, 232, 252, 263,
27°,283,295,323,331,337,352,
389
(Note: this list includes ail passages in
whüh the German expressions have
been translated b.1 'undifferentiated',
'without further differentiation',
etc.)
tindifferent: *gleichgültig
(fin. H. 42, 255, 429)
H.42, 121, 123f, 134, 144, 175, 243f,
254, 265, 280, 342, 345, 352,
358, 361, 386, 429f (Hegel)
tindignant: ungehalten .
(fin. H. 347)
H. 174, 347
individual, individuality: einzdn
(*single; particular, H. 399);
*individuell (H. 395); *Individualitat (H. 403)
tindividualize: *vereinzdn
(ftn. H. 142)
H. 39, 142, 187-189, 191, 263-266 ,
276f, 280, 307, 310, 322, 336,
339, 343
tindividuation: *Individuation
H·3 8
infer: schliessen, Schluss; folgern;
entnehmen; erschliessen (H.
3 18)
(fin. H. 75, 3 15)
tinfinite, infinity: unendlich, *Unendlichkeit
(fin. H. 330)
H. 92f, 33of, 424f, 427 n. xiii

Index of English Expressions
tin-finite, in-finitude: *un-endlich,
*Un-endlichkeit
(fin. H. 330)
H·33 0f
information: Kenntnis; Aufschluss;
*Auskunftj *Nachricht; Kunde
H. 9, 52, 148 , 27 2f, 280, 287, et passim
tinhood; *Inheit
H·53
inner, inside, inward: inner, *innerlich; *innen, *Innen-; *inwendig; innig (H. 216)
H. 31, 56, 60, 62,101,132, 136f, 188,
203-206, 216, 273, 364, 389,
401 (Torck), 435 (Hegel)
tinner experience: *innere Erfahrung
H. 204
tinner Iife: *Innenleben
H.273
tinner sense: *innerer Sinn
H. 203
tinner sphere: *Innensphare, *innere Sphare
H. 60, 62
tBeing inside: *Innensein
H.60
t Insideness: *Inwendigkeit
H. 56, 101, 132, 188
inquire: fragen
H. 5, 7-1 l,20f, 38, et passim
tinsignificance; lacking significance:
*Unbedeutsamkeit;
*Bedeutungslosigkeit (H. 273)
H. 186f, 273, 343
tinspect: nachsehen; *beschauen (H.
146); *zusehen (H. 81)
(fin. H. 123)
H. 355, 35 8
tintelligible: *verstandlich
(fin. H. 151)
H. 4, 59, 81, 86, 151-153, 161-165,
168f, 209, 220, 271, 324, 225,
366, 368f, 405, 4°8,410,412
(Note: this list also includes the passages
in which 'unintelligible' and 'unintelligibility' occur.)
tintend: *intendieren
(fin. H. 5)
H. 5, 94, 295, 390
tintent (adj.): gespannt
H. 175, 261f
tintention, intentional: *intentional
H. 48, 363 (n. xxiii)
interconnection: Zusammenhang

545

Interpret, Interpretation: *interpretieren, *Interpretation
(fin. H. 1) (tif. H. 130, 15°,232,331)
interpret, interpretation: auslegen,
*Auslegung
(ftn. H. l, 148, 149,4°9) (dj. H. 62,
148, 149, 150, 231f)
H. 148-160 (Sections 32,33), et passim
interragate: *befragen
H. 5f, 8, 13f, 41, 56, et passim
tintervene: einspringen
(ftn. H. 100)
H.loo
tintuit, intuition: anschauen; *Wesensschau (intuition of essences, H.
147)
But cf. intuitionists (*Intuitionismus, H. 9), intuitive (*intuitiv,
H·37)
(fin. H. 27, 402)
anschauen:
farms ofi.: H. 31, 367
objects of i.: H. 30, 215, 358
i. of Reality: H. 202
i. of space: H. 112
i. as care: H. 193
limitations of pure beholding: H.
135, 138, 34 1
VO€LVas beholding: H. 96, 171
Hegel on i.: H. 43of, 433f
Husserl on i.: H. 363 n. xxiii
Kant on i.: H. 3of, 215, 358, 367
Torck on i.: H.. 402
(Note: this list also includes alt
passages in which 'anschauen' is
translated as 'behold'.)
invoke: berufen
tinvolve, involvement: *bewenden,
*Bewandtnis
(fin. H. 84)
H. 80, 83-88 (Section 18), 99f, 103f,
110-112, 117, 123, 129, 140,
144, 148-15°, 158, 186, 210,
261, 297, 300, 343, 353"357,
359"361, 364, 368 ,4 12
tirrationalism: *Irrationalismus
H.136
tirresoluteness: *Unentschlossenheit
H. 299, 308, 322, 33 6, 33 8f, 384, 390,
4 10
tisolate: *isolieren
(fin. H. 142)
isolated "1" or subject: H. 116, 118,
179, 188, 192f, 204, 206, 298, 321
SeealsoH. 19,82,247,344, 352f, 388

546

Being and Time

issue: *es geht um ...
(fin. H. 8)
(df. H. 191, 192)
t'it' calls: *"es" ruft
(fin. H. 275)
H.275- 277
item-: Moment
item of equipment: Zeug
(fin. H. 68)
tjoy: Freude
H. 3 10, 345
judgment: *Urteil, *urteilen, *beurteilen
But cf. verurteilen (condemn, H.
185)
j. and assertion: H. 32,153,214,224,
226
j. and the copula: H. 159,349
j. and binding: H. 32, 159
j. and knowing etc.: H. 210 (Scheler),
213,216f
j. and Àoyos: H. 32
j. and the "they": H. 127
j. and truth: H. 33,214,226
j. and validity: H. 155f
covert judgments: H. 4 (Kant), 23
(Kant)
theoretical judgments: H. 157
acts vs. content of j.: H. 156, 216f
See also H. 204 (Kant), 224 (Kant),
273·
'de " :
tthe "just-always-already-alongsl
*das Nur-immer-schon-sein-bei
(fin. H. 195)
H.195
the 'just as': das "So--Wie"
H. 216, 218
(Cf. also H. 219, 222)
tthe 'just now': *das "soeben"
H. 4°7,424
tjust-present-at-hand-and-no-more:
*nur noch vorhanden
(fin. H. 74)
H. 73,81,88, 238
tkeep silent: schweigen
H. 161, 164f, 273, 296, 323
know, knowledge: erkennen, Erkenntnis
*wissen; kennen, Kenntnis; etc.
But cf. make known (bekunden;
*kundgeben, *Kundgabe; ankÜDdigen); well-known (hekannt)
(fin. H. 25, 36, 123, 124, 146)

erkennen, Erkenntnis:
(Note: this List also includes several
passages in which these words have
been translated as 'cognize', 'cognition', etc., but not those in which
they have been translated as 'recognize'.)
k/c (in general): H. 71, 134, 138, 17of,
324, et passim
k/c of Nature: H. 152
k/c of the present-at-hand (See
theoretical k/c.)
k/c of the Real: H. 202
k/c of the Self: H. 146
k/c ofspace: H. III
k/c ofthe world (See know the worl~.)
k/c and intuition: H. 258, 363 n. XXIII
k/c, judgment, and truth: H. 210,
215-219, 228
k/c and making-present: H. 363 n.
xxiii
k/c and mood: H. 134; 136
k/c and understanding: H. 143,356
historiological k/c: H. 392
perceptual k/c: H. 67
rigorous k/c: H. 152
scientific k/c: H. 28, 152, 324
theoretical k/c: H. 69, 136, 166, 335,
352, 356-364 (Section 69b)
theory of knowledge (See epistemology.)
Augustine on k/c: H. 171
Descartes on k/c: H. 95f, 100
Kant on k/c: H. 215, 358
Scheler on k/c: H. 210
wissen:
k. ofdeath: H. 251, 258, 425
k. of distances: H. 106
k. of entities encountered: H. 58
k. of space: H. 368
k. of what one is capable of: H.
144, 270, 336
k. and acquaintance, H. 155
k. and curiosity: H. 172
k. and mood: H. 134-136
k. and the Other: H. 174
Scheler on k.: H. 210, 210 n. xix
kennen, Kenntnis: H. 36, 124f, 169,
178, 252, 300, 330, 367, 4° 1,
425, et passim
(See also acquaintance, informa. tion, take cognizance.)
tknow oneself: *Sichkennen
(fin. H. 124)
H.124f

Index of English Expressions
tknOw the world: *Welterkennen,
*das Erkennen der Welt
H. 58, 59-62 (Section 13), 65, 67,
13 1, 138

lack: Mangel, mangeln, mangelhaft,
ermangeln; fehlen; Un-; etc.
t Mangeln, mangeln, mangelhaft,
ermangeln:
(dj. H. 283)
H. 16, 113, 233, 260, 269, 282f,
285f, 29 1, 336, 374
tfebJen:H·4,9,39,82, 163, 179,202,
233, 243, 256, 328
tUn-:
.
th·
. 'ficUnbestunm
elt: 1acking slgm
ance: H. 186
Unfreiheit: lack offreedom: H. 312
Unganzheit: lack of totality: H.
236, 242, 244, 259
Ungestimmtheit: lack of mood:
H. 134, 345, 37 1
Unkenntnis: lack ofacquaintance:
H. 146
unverstiindig: lacking in understanding: H. 219
Unverstiindnis: lack of understanding: H. 195, 207
U nzusammen: lack of togetherness: H. 242f, 409f
(Note: as these entries indicate, we
have used the word 'lack' much
mOre freely thon Heidegger's discussion on H. 283 strictly warrants.)
language: *Sprache; Sprach-; sprachlich; etc.
(fin. H. 25) (dj. H. 160, 161)
H. 9, 87, 119, 133, 157, 160- 16 7
(Section 34),272,349,369,4°6
last (verb): *dauern
H. 391,409
the "later" : das Spater
H. 327, 421
the "later on": das "Spaterhin"
H. 407, 409
tlaw: *Gesetz
H. 10,47, 226f, 282f, 293, 361 , 395
tlaw-breaking: *Rechtsverletzung
H. 282f
tlay open: *aufschliessen
(fin. H. 75)
H. 75, 359
t lay out: auslegen (H. 4°9); anlegen
(H. 1°4); *herauslegen (H. 150)
(fin. H. 149,409)

547

tleap after: *nachspringen
(fin. H. 347)
H. 347, 369
tleap ahead: *vorausspringen
(fin. H. 122)
H.122
tleap away: entspringen; abspringen
(H.262)
H. 347f, 350
(fin. H. 347, 348)
(Note: cf. also H. 427, et passim.)
tleap forth and liberate: *vorspringend-befreiend
(ftn. H. 122)
H. 122,298
tleap in: einspringen
(ftn. H. 100, 122)
H.122
tleeway: *Spielraum
(fin. H. 368)
H. 107, 145,355, 368f
let be: sein lassen
H. 84f, 345, 354
let be encountered: begegnen lassen
(fin. H. 328, 329) (dj. H. 137,366)
H.85 f, III, 137,326, 328, 346, 354,
356, 366, 4 08
tlet be involved: *bewenden lassen
(fin. H. 84) (dj. H. 84f,353ff) .
H. 84-86, I l of, 353-356
tlet he seen: *sehen lassen
H. 32-35, 44, 63, 154f, 158,213, 218f,
360
let come towards oneself: *auf sich
zukommen lassen
(See come towards.)
level: *Niveau; etc.
tlevel down: *einebnen
H. 127f
tlevel off: *nivellieren
H. 88, 158, 194, 220, 253, 329, 405,
422,424-426, 431f, 432 n. xxx,
435
tliberate: *hefreien
H. 113, 122, 165,264,288,298,3°3,
344
tliberty of indifference: *Gleichgültigkeit der Willkür
H.I44
tlie ahead of: *vorlagern
(fin. H. 259, 264, 302)
H. 259, 264, 302
life, living; Leben, leben, etc.
But cf. livelihood (*Fortkommen)
(ftn. H. 46, 58) (dj. H. 46, 50, 58)

Being and Time
lif~ont.

that which has life (Lebewesen,
Lebendiges, Lebendes, Nurlebendes): H. 10, 25, 48, 50,
97, 165, 194, 240, 247, 346, 377
life and care: H. 198 (Hyginus)
life and death: H. 1°4,238,24°,245247, 249 n. vi, 3 16
(Su also connectedness of life.)
life and historicality: H. 401 (TOTCk)
life and historiology: H. 396
(Nut;:.sW)
life and language: H. 163
life and philosophy: H. 402 (TOTck)
life and Reality: H. 212
life and the "they": H. 177
life, curiosity, and idle talk: H. 173
life as a business: H. 289
the full and genuine 'life': H. 177
tthe inner life (*Innenleben) : H. 273
tthe cares oflife (*Lebenssorge): H.
57
the connectedness of life (Ste connectedness.)
the philosophy oflife: H. 46, 48, 398,
403
the science of life (biology): H. 9f,
28,49
living (in general): H. 194tliving along (*dahinleben): H. 345,
405
'living' away from oneself: H. 179
'living' concretely: H. 178
living in a myth: H. 313
living in an understanding of Being:
H·4
tliving on (*fortleben): H. 247
tliving unto the day (*in den Tag
hieninleben): H. 37of
tliving-through (*Er-Ieben): H. 47
(&heler)
the urge 'to live': H. 195f
getting lived by one's world: H. 195f
getting lived by the ambiguity of
publicness: H. 299
Dilthey on life: H. 46, 209f, 249 n. vi,
3gB
TOTck on life: H. 400-402
light: Licht; Helle; leicht; etc.
But cf. light up (*aufleuchten)
(fin. H. 133, 360)
Licht: H. 28, 350f, 359, 412f, et
passim
Hel1e: H. 28
leicht: H. 360f

tlight up: *aufleuchten
H. 72, 75f, 83, 343
tliken: angleichen
(fin. H. 214)
H. 153, 2 14, 21 9, 393
(Note: this list includes ail passages in
which 'angleichen' kas hem transtated as 'assimilate'.)
t limit-situation: *Grenzsituation
H. 249 n. vi, 301 n. vi, 308, 349
tlink: *verkettenj *verknüpfen;
*knüpfen
H. 33, 159, 202, 268, 388, 390, 4 17
tliquidate:
beheben
(*obviate,
*remedy)
(fm. H. 236,300)
H. 236, 242
tlisten: horen; *abhOrenj *hinhorenj
*zuhoren
(fm. H. 271)
tlisten (*zuhoren): H. 164
tlisten away (*hinhoren): H. 271
tlisten in (*abhOren): H. 139, 175
tlisten to (*hOren auf ...): H. 163,
168, 271, 275
lit up (Su light up.)
literature: *Literatur
H. 10, 127, 397
live (See life.)
tlocation, locus, local, locative: *Ort,
*ortlich
(fin· H. 44)
location of Dasein: H. 132, 368,
4 1 7f ,424
location of the present-at-hand: H.
54,361f
spatial location: H. 54, II 9, 132,
299, 416-4 18, 428 (Aristotle)
change oflocation: H. 91, 97, 389
locative expressions: H. II9
locus in a system: H. 428f
locus oflanguage: H. 166
locus of the problem of history: H.
375
locus of the problem of historicality :
H·377
locus oftruth: H. 33,154,214,226
logic, logical: *Logik, *logisch
H. 2f, rof, 129, 143, 152, 157-160,
165, 214f, 285, -3 15, 3 19, 357,
375, 398f, 43 2 n. xxx, 433, 437
tlongevity: *Lebensdauer
H. 246, 246 n. v
look: Su entries helow.
tabsehen (look away): H. 361

Index of English Expressions
look-cont.
tsich ausnehmen wie . . . (look
like ...) H. 398
t*Ausschau halten (look out for):
H. 153
taussehen: H. 28-3°,42, 61, 63, 69,
73, 135, 138, 172f, 222, 346,
4°3
(Note: this list also includes the one
passage in which 'Aussehen' is
translated as 'outward appearance'
-viz. H. 69.)
Blick, *Durchblick, *Blickweite,
Hinblick, *hinblicken, *rückblicken: see passim.
t*hinsehen, *Hin-sicht: H. 7,33,61,
69,73,79,112,119,135,138,14 1,
149, 158, 220, 264, 335f, 35 1,
357
tpflegen (look after): H. 54, 56
sehen: H. 67, 71,416
tsuchen:H.278,423
t*Oberschau (look over): H. 358
t*umsehen (look around): H. 336,
358
t*wegsehen (look away): H. II9,
261f, 347, 424
lose, loss: verlieren (waste, H. 157)j
Verlust (go, H. 56); *verlustig
gehen; etc.
lose its aroundness: H. II2
lose its basis: H. II9
lose its Being: H. 176,239
lose the Being of one's "there": H.
237
lose one's Being-in-the-world: H.
236,238
lose its equipmental character: H.
361
lose its force: H. 127
lose its genuineness: H. 142
lose its indigenous character: H. 36
lose its involvement-character: H.
II2
lose one's life: H. 235, 238
IOle oneself: H. 42,76, II6, 124, 128,
177, 179, 195, 253, 265, 289,
3 12, 344, 348f, 369, 390
lose its readiness-to-hand: H. 73f
IOle its sign-character: H. 81
lose one's time: H. 4°4,410,418,425
lost in what is encountered withinthe-world: H. 76
lost in equipment: H. 354,422
lost in everydayness: H. 263

549

lost in factual circumstances: H. 265
lost in irresoluteness: H. 308
lost in just-always-already-alongside :
H.195
lost in the making-present of the
"to-day": H. 391
lost in possibilities which thrust
thernselves upon one: H. 264
lost in publicness: H. 175,271
lost in something with which one is
concerned: H. 277, 289, 312,
344, 4 22, 424
lost in the "they": H. 175, 177, 189,
253, 268, 27 1, 274, 287, 289,
297,299, 307f, 383, 390
lost in the they-self: H. 263, 266
lost in the world ofequipment: H. 354
lost in one's 'world': H. 221, 277,
3 12 , 348f
lost hearing: H. 271
lost making-present: H. 355, 369
lost Present: H. 345
(See also H. 119, 166,277,348, 390,
4°7)
tlove: *Liebe
H. 190 n. iv
tloyalty: *Treue
H. 385, 391
t lust of the eyes: *Augenlust
H. 171
tmagic: *Magie; *Zauberei
H. 81, 247, 313
maintain: halten, erhalten, durchhalten, festhalten; etc.
(fm. H. 256)
tmake certain: *sich vergewissern
(fm. H. 291)
H. 265, 291, 293
make determinate: bestimmen
H.62
tmake history: *Geschichte machen
H·378
make known: *bekunden; *kundgeben,
Kundgabe; ankündigen
make one's own: aneignen (appropriate)
H. 15,21,62,71, 171,220,226, 377,
386, 396-398
(Note: this list also includes alt passages
in which 'aneignen' is translated as
'appropriate'. )
tmake present: *gegenwartigen
(fin. H. 326, 347, 359) (dj. H. 328,
338, 366 )

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time
malte present-cont.
H. 26, 326-328, 338f, 342, 344, 346350, 353-357, 359 f, 363, 363 n.
xxiii, 365f, 369, 381, 391, 406410, 4 13f, 4 16-4 18, 4 20-4 22 , 4 25
fmake public: verôffentlichen
H. 41 11414f, 4 17-4 20, 4 23
(Note: this List aIso includes ail passages
in which 'veriiffmtlichen' is translated as Ogive a public character',
but not those in which it is transLated as 'publish' or 'publication'.)
fmake room: *einraumen
(ftn. H. II l, 368)
H. III, 299, 368f
fmake unpresent: *ungegenwartigen
H·355
make up, go to make up: awmachen
(constitute; establish; etc.)
But cf. make up for (nachholen, 268,
4°6); help make up (mitmachen, H. 176).
malte we (See use.)
man: Mensch (human, etc.)
man's Being: H. 25,45, 48f
man's Being towards God: H. 10,
190 n. iv
man's good: H. 199
man's spatiality:
man's substance: H. 117,212,314man's transcendence: H. 49
man qs rational animal: H. 48f, 165,
183, 197
man as the entity which talks: H. 165
man as unity of body, souI, spirit:
H.48, 117, 198
man as made in God's image: H. 48f
man as the 'subject' ofevents: H. 379
man as an 'atom' in world-history:
H·382
man and Dasein: H. 25,46, 182
man and the world: H. 57, 105, 152
man and the environment: H. 57
man and the lumen naturale: H. 133
Aristotle on man: H. 171
Calvin on man: H. 49
Dilthey on man: H. 398
Hyginus on man: H. 198f
Seneca on man: H. 199
Zwingli on man: H. 49
Su also H. 51, 54, 60, 97, 120, 176,
179, 198, 203, 246, 37 1, 379,
382 , 396, 400f, 425.
(Note: this List also includes the
principal passages in which the word

'human' has bem used in translating
'Menseh', 'mensehlich', or the prefix
'Mensehen-'. In view of Heidegger's
insistence in H. 46 that the term
'Menseh' is to be avoided, these
passages are of interest.)
manage: vorstehen (H. 143); etc.
(fin. H. 143)
manifest:
*offenbar,
offenbaren;
*Machtausserung (H. 275);
*Lehensmanifestation (H. 402)
manifold: mannigfaltig; mannigfach;
vielfliltig
fmanipuIate, manipulable: *hantieren;
handlich
hantieren: H. 33, 61, 67, 69, 102,
352-354, 357-361
handlich: H. 68f, 73, 78, 108f, 12 7,
288, 355, 414, 4 18
(Note: this List includes ail passages
in which 'handlich' and its derivatives OCCUT. SU our glossary entry.)
fmanual: handlich (H. 109); Handhuch (H. 9)
material: materiell, material, Material j
Geschichtsstoff (H. 4°°)
tmateriell: H. 47 n. ii, 98f, 238
tmaterial: H. 68, 293f, 320 n. xix
t Material: H. 73, 320 n. xix, 366,
394
tmathematics: *Mathematik
H. 9, 63, 65, 88, 95f, 153, 362 , 402
matter (noun): *Materie; etc.
t*Materie: H. 10, 91, 362
(Note: the noun 'matter' has bem used
informally in transLating many
other expressions.)
matter (verb): angehen, *Anganglichkeit; etc.
H. 106, 121f, 137-139, 141, 170
maturity (Su bring to maturity.)
meaning: Sinn
(ftn. H. 1, 137, 151) (dj. H. 15 1153, 156, 161, 324)
meaning of Being: *Seinssinn, *Sinn
des Seins, *Sinn von Sein
meaningfuI: *sinnvoll (H. 151)
meaningless: *sinnlos (H. 151)
unmeaning: *unsinnig (H. 152)
give meaning: *Sinn gehen (H. 324f)
have meaning: *Sinn haben
. H. 151, 154, 221, 324, 348, 361
(Note: while the noun 'meaning' has
bem reserved for 'Sinn', the verb
'mean' has bem used informally to

meaning~ont.

translate 'meinen', 'heissm', 'besagm', 'sagen', etc.)
measure, measurement: Mass, messen,
awmessen; metrisch; etc.
But cf. measure up (genügen); cut
to the measure (zugeschnitten).
(dj. H. 417f.)
m. of space and spatial distances: H.
102~ 105~ IIO~ 369
m. of time: H. 7 1, 404, 413-415,
4 17-4 19
See also H. 68, 262, 358,417 n. iv.
(Note: the German expressions listed
and their derivatives are often
translated informally in other
ways.)
fmechanics: *Mechanik (H. 429, Hegel)
But cf. fmechanical (*mechanisch,
H. 400, Torek; *handwerklich,
H·394)
fmechanistic: *mechanistisch (H. 402,
Torek)
But cf. *mechanism (*Mechanismw,
H. 10; *Getriebe, H. 382)
(fin. H. 402)
fmedical: *medizinisch
H. 241, 247
medieval ontology
H. 3, 25, 40, 93 f
metaphysics: *Metaphysik
H. 2, 21f, 56, 59, 248, 293, 40lf
(Torek), 433 n. xxx
method, methodology, methodological,
methodical: *Methode, *methodisch, *Methodologie (H. 38,
398), *Methodik (H. 202); Weg
(H. 55)
(dj. H. 303)
H. 2, 27-39 (Section 7), 49, 66f, 13 1,
139, 156, 160, 182, 185, 190,
202, 205 n. xv (Dilthey), 208,
215, 230, 248, 255 n. xiii, 280,
3°1-305 (Section 61), 309, 3103 16 (Section 63),324,332,362,
38 7, 393, 398 (Dilthey) , 399f
(Torek), 402 (Torek)
mine, fmineness: meines, *Jemeinigkeit
H. 41-43, 53, 114-116, 118, 191,228,
232, 240, 253, 278, 424f
fmisgivings: *Bangigkeit
H. 142,345
miss: fehlen (lack; absence; etc.),
verfehlen (fail; etc.); *vermissen

55 1

fehlen:
(dj. H. 120f, 283, 355)
H. 73, 75, 120f, 191, 242f, 283,
353,355,40 7,4 22
(Note: see also ourentryfor 'laek' above,
and cf. H. 24, 49f, 55, 149, 203,
216, 273,339,357, where 'fehlen'
has been translated in other ways.)
verfehlen: H. 130, et passim
vermissen:
(dl H. 73, 355)
H. 73, 294, 355
mode, modal, modify: *Modus,
*modal, *modifizieren
(fin. H. 20, 59)
fmoment, moment of vision: *Augenvlick; *momentweise (H. 292)
(fin. H. 328, 338)
But cf. momentary (*momentan,
H. 374, 423, 430).
fmoment: H. 142, 165, 172, 258,
3°8,39 1,425
fmoment of vision: H. 328, 338,
338 n. iii, 344f, 347, 349f, 37 1,
385f, 39 1f, 397, 4 10, 4 2 7
fmonument: *Denkmal
H. 78,394
fmonumental:
*monumentalisch,
*monumental
H. 396f (Nietzsche)
gestimmt
tmood:
*Stimmung;
(attuned)
(fin. H. 134> 344)
H. 134-139, 142, 148,162,169,190,
25 1f, 265, 270, 276f, 284, 3 10, 335,
339-34 6, 37 1
(Note: this list includes the passages in
which 'gestimmt' and its derivatives
have bem translated by forms of
'attune' or 'have a mood'.)
fbad mood: *Verstimmung: H. 134,
136
flack of mood: *Ungestimmtheit:
H. 134,345, 37 1
moon: *Mond
H.243
fmoral: *moralisch, etc.; *sittlich, etc.
H. 167,282,286,288,293,295
fmortal: *sterblich
H.199
most part (See for the most part.)
tmotion: Bewegung, sich bewegen (H.
4 1 9)
H. 10, 91, 178, 180, 362, 375, 388f,
39 2,4 19, 532 n. xxx, 435

55 2

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

move : bewegen; rücken; -raumen;
elc.
tmove around: umraumen (rearrange, H. 109): H. 111,368
tmove out of the way: wegraumen
(c1ear away, H. 129): H. III,
308, 368
tmovement: *Bewegtheit; Bewegung;
Richtung (H. 38, 47)
*Bewegtheit: H. 134, 177-180, 343,
374f, 388 n. ix, 389
Bewegung: H. 9, 9 1, 97, 109, 4 21
(Arislolle) , 421, 428 (Arislolle),
435
multiplicity: l\hnnigfaltigkeit; Vielfaltigkeit (H. 322); *Vielheit
(H. 429)
H. 3, 102f, 110, 112, 164, 203, 362,
417, 429, et passim
tmyth: *Mythos
H. 51 n. xi, 313
Nature, natural: *Natur, *natürlich
(dj. H. 65)
*Natur, *NaturH. 9-11, 18,25,47 n. ii, 48, 60, 63,
65, 70f, 89, 95, 98-100, 106, 112,
l44f, 152, 165, 179, 199, 211,
361 -3 63, 377, 379, 388, 388 n.
ix, 398-400, 401 (Torck) , 404,
412f, 415, 417 n. iv, 418, 428
(Aristotle); 429, 431,432 n. xxx,
434 (Hegel)
tnatural history: *Naturgeschichte:
H·388
tnatural science: *Naturwissenschaft: H. 63, 362, 398, 400
(Torck)
tenvironing Nature: *Umweltnatur:
H. 7 1, 381 , 413
tThing of Nature: *Naturding: H.
48, 63, 99f, 21 1
(Note: while 'Natur' has been translaled eilher as 'Nature' or as
'natural', 'nalürlich' has been translated onry as 'natural'. The word
'nature' has bem used informalry 10
translate other expressions.)
tnaturalistic: *naturalistisch
H. 47 n. ii, 320 n. xix
necessity: Notwendigkeit
H. 143, 214, 226, 228f, et passim
tnegate, negation: *negieren, Negation
(deny, H. 229)
H. 22, 207. 229. 286,429-435 (Hegel)

negative: *negativ; prohibitiv (H. 260)
H. 159, 248, 286, 429f (Hegel), 433 f
(Hegel)
neo-Kantian epistemology
H. 21 5
tnever dwelling anywhere: *Aufenthaltlosigkeit
new: neu (*novelty, H. 172; eu.)
H. 174,271,346,348,391
no longer: nicht mehr
tno-Ionger- being-able-to- be-there:
Nicht-mehr-dasein-konnen: H.
25 0
(fIn. H. 250)
tno-Ionger-Being-there: H. 236 (Cf.
H. 381 , 393)
tno longer Dasein
(fin. H. 250)
H. 237f, 240, 242, 330
tno-Ionger-now: *nicht-mehr-jetzt
H. 327,421,424
tnow-no-Ionger: *jetzt nicht mehr
H. 380, 406, 421
tno longer present-at-hand: H. 374,
378, 380
t Being-no-Ionger-in-the-world: H.
176, 238, 24°
See also H. 373, 43of (Hegel), el
passim.
nobody: *Niemand
H. 128, 177,253,268,278,425
no one: keiner; eu.
H. 127f
the "not'" *das Nicht
H. 29, ;83-286
tnotness; *Nichtheit
H. 285f
tnot-Being: *Nichtsein
H. 17°,243,431 (Hegel), 434 (Hegel)
tnot right away: *vorlaufig noch nicht
H. 255, 258
not yet: noch nicht
(fin. H. 259)
H. 145,242-246,25°,259,317,325,
347, 373, 380, 393f, 4 27, 43 of
(Hegel), et passim
tthe "not-yet-now": *das Nochnicht-jetzt: H. 327, 421, 424,

42 7

tthe "now-not-yet": *das Jetztnoch-nicht: H. 406, 309, 421
tBeing-not-yet: *Noch-nicht-sein:
H. 237, 246
...
tnot yet present-at-hand: H. 144,
237, 243, 374

nothing: nichts; eu.
H. 43, 128, 186-189, 266, 273, 276f,
279, 308, 343, 352,431 (Hegel),
et passim
J
tnovelty: das Neue (new)
H.17 2
noW: jetzt; etc.
H. 325, 338, 338, n. iii, 373, 378,
4°6-411,414,416-418,421-427,
43°-432, 432, n. xxx
tnow-here: *Jetzt-hier: H. 421, 430
now-no-Ionger (See no longer.)
now-not-yet (See not yet.)
tnow-point: *Jetzt-Punkt: H. 430
now that: jetzt, da ..•
(ftn. H. 408)
H. 406-408, 410f, 414, 422
tnow-time: *Jetzt-zeit: H. 421, 423,
426
tjust now: *soeben: H. 407, 424
no-Ionger-now (See no longer.)
not-yet-now (See not yet.)
tmultiplicity of "nows": *Jetztmannigfaltigkeit: H. 417
say "now": *Jetzt-sagen: H. 406,
408,416,418,421
tsequence of "nows": *J etztfolge,
*Foige der Jetzt: H. 329, 373,
422-426, 43 1f
H
tstream of "nows": *Jetztfluss: .
6
10
4 ,43
nowhere: *nirgends
H. 175, 177, 186-188,347
tnull: nichtig
But cf. annul (tilgen, H. 434);
nullify (vernichten, H. 61, 131)
(ftn. H. 284) (dj. H. 285, 343)
H. 23, 178, 206, 219, 237, 283-288,
305f, 308, 325, 330, 343f, 348
(Note: this list also includes those
passages in which 'nichtig' is translated as 'nugatory' and 'count for
nothing'.)
number (noun): *Zahl; *Anzahl (H.
125,4°9); *Masszahl (H. 4 17);
eu.
Zahl: H. 215, 418, 432 n. xxx
(Bergson)
tnumeral: *Nummer
H. 125
tnumeration: *Geschichtszahl (historical numeration, H. 418 n. v)
tnumerical: *zahlenmassig (H. 412,
418); *zahlhaft (H. 18)

553

tObject: *Objekt
(fin. H. 363) (dj. H. 363)
O. andjudgment: H. 156,216
O. andsubject: H. 59f, 156, 176, 179,
192,2°4,208,216,219,366,388
(Note: cf. also H. 316.)
o and world: H. 60, 179, 203, 366
O. of historiology, etc.: H. 10, 375f,
392, 397, 401
object: *Gegenstand; eu.
(Note: the word 'object' kas often
bem used informalry in translating
substanlivi;;ed participles such as
'das Besorgte'-'the object of concern'-eu.)
Gegenstand :
o. of an assertion: H. 157
o. ofconcern: H. 238
o. of historiology, eu.: H. 152,
375, 380, 39 2-395
o. ofjudgment: H. 214, 224, 273
o. ofknowing: H. 60, 215 (Kant),
218
o. of mathematics: H. 9
o. ofphenomenology: H. 34-36
o. of a science: H. 9f, 238, 361
o. to be disclosed: H. 232, 303
person as o.: H. 47f (Scheler), 114
Kant on o.: H. 215, 224
Scheler on o.: H. 47f, 210
tObjectify: *objektivieren; *objicieren
(H·4 19)
H. 48, 82, 363, 375f, 37 8, 381 , 4 19f
tObjective: *objektiv
(dj. H. 395, 4 19)
O. Being: H. 64
O. distance: H. 106
Objectively actual: H. 272 n. vi
(Stoker)
Objectively 'there': H. 389
Objectively valid: H. 156
Objectivity and subjectivity: H. 278,
326, 366, 405, 4 19
Objectivity of the appeal: H. 278
Objectivity ofhistoriology: H. 395
Objectivity of a science: H. 395
Objectivity oftime: H. 405, 419
Objectivity of the world: H. 366
See also H. 237,260,275, 289, 363
t objective: *sachlich
H. Il, 21, 27, 45, 98, 122, 265, 333,
377
observe: betrachten (consider; study;
contemplate. H. III 3) ; *beobachten

554

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

observe--cont.

*beobachten: H. 340, 358, 362, 415
tobstinacy: *Aufsassigkeit
(fin. H. 74)
H·74f, 186,354
tobtrusiveness: *Aufdringlichkeit
(fin. H. 74)
H. 73-75, 81, 189, 354, 377
obvious: selbstverstiindlich (*self-evident); offensichtlich (open, H.
128); etc.
occasion, occasionally, on occasion:
*Veranlassung; *gelegentlich;
jeweils; zuweilen; etc.
(See also on that former occasion.)
toccupy: einnehmen (take in, H. 368f);
*besetzbar (H. 103)
But cf. occupation (*Beruf, H. 239)
(ftn. H. 368)
H. 103, 107f, 413, 416
occur: *vorkommen
(fin. H. 106)
H. 12, 29, 33, 48, 54-56, 63, 69f, 73,
79-81, 102, 104, 117, 119-121,
12 5, 128, 154, 170, 173, 177,
179, 188, 194,252-254,257,269,
27 8, 29 1, 299f, 327, 332, 338,
344, 367, 384, 404f, 4 19f
tocular: *okular
400 (rorek), 402 (rorek)
ton that former occasion: *damals
H. 406-4°9, 421f
on the basis of: auf dem Grunde (by
reason of; because of); auf dem
Boden; woraufhin (with regard
to which; upon which; whereupon; etc.)
woraufhin: H. 6, 85f, 110, 143
ton its way: *unterwegs
H·79
tonce for aIl: *einmalig
H·395
oncoming (See come along.)
t'one dies': "man stirbt"
H.253- 255
ontical: *ontisch
(ftn. H. II)
H. 11-15 (Section 4), 19, 43, 92, 63,
94, 114; 116, 182, 199,201,266,
279, 293, 3 12, 324, 37 1, 382,
399f (rorek), 402f, et passim
ontology, ontological: *Ontologie,
*ontologisch
(fin. H. 1l, 12) (4[. H. 1l, 12,27,35,
38, 23 1, 232• 248)

H. 8-11 (Section 3), 12, 15f, 27, 43,
52, 94, 116, 182, 199, 201, 204,
210, 301-333 (II. III), 266,
295, 31If, 403, 436, et passim
(See also ancient o.• fundamental o.,
medieval o.)
topaque: *undurchsichtig
H. 11,44, 146, 156
open: *offen; *ôffnen; etc.
H. 137, 163, 169, 265. 30 7f, 34 1, 350,
369, 392f, 396f. 408, 421
topportunity: *Gelegenheit
H. 172, 174, 300, 359, 38g
ordinary: *vulgar
(4[. H. 28g)
o. conception of Being: H. 387, 389
o. conception ofBeing guilty: H. 282
o. conception of conscience: H. 269f,
279, 289- 295 (Section 59)
o. conception of the 'connectedness
oflife': H. 374
o. conception ofDasein: H. 374, 378,

42 7

o. conception ofhistoricality: H. 377
o. conception of history: H. 376f,
378-382 (Section 73)
o. conception of phenomenon: H.
3 1, 35, 37
o. conception of time: H. 17f, 24,
235, 304, 3 26, 329f, 333, 338 n.
iii, 404-437 (II, VI)
origin, orginate: Herkunft (derivation)
toriginal: *originar
But cf. original sin (Erbsünde. H.
190, n. iv.)
H. 37, 62, 224
Other: Andere; fremd (H. 124)
(dj. H. 118)
Being towards Others: H. 124f, 177
Being-with Others (Su Being-with.)
coming to owe something to Others:
H.282
conscience of Others: H. 298
Dasein-with of Others (Su Daseinwith.)
death of Others: H. 237-241 (Section
47), 254, 257
encountering ofOthers: H. 117, 120,
12 5
fearing for Others: H. 141f
potentiality-of-Being of Others: H.
264,298
solicitude for Others (See solicitude.)
understanding Others: H. 123

Other--cont.
See also H. 126, 128f, 155, 174,260,

281f, 383, 418
(Note: the uncapitali;:;ed 'other' kas
been used to translate the uneapitalized adjective 'andere' etc.)

tthe other-worldly: *das Jenseits
H.148
ought: Sollen
H. 283
out for ... (See Being out for.)
toutlast: *überdauern
H.247
outside: ausser; Aussen, draussen:
ausserhalb
tBeing-outside: *Draussensein: H.
62, 162
tBeing-outside-of-itself: *Aussersichsein: H. 429f (Hegel)
tthe "outside-of-itself": *das Aussersich: H. 329, 350, 365
the "outside-of-one-another": *das
Aussereinander: H. 429 (Hegel)
See also H. 62, 118, 136, 162, 177,
205, 227, 243, 366, 374, 4 19,
435
(Note: see also 'external world'.)

toutstanding: *Ausstand, ausstehen
(ftn. H. 236, 250) (4[. H. 242)
H. 144, 227, 233f, 236f, 241-246
(Section 48), 249f, 259, 3 17, 374
toutstrip: *überholen
(fin. H. 391) (4[. H. 264)
H. 250-256, 258f, 263-265, 307, 309,
330, 383, 386, 39 1
over again (See repeat.)
towe: *schulden; verdanken (H. 405)
But cf. come to owe (schuldig werden)
(fin. H. 281)
H. 242, 281f
ownmost: eigenst
tpallid lack-of-mood : *fahle Dngestimmtheit
H. 134,345,371
tparadoxicality: *Paradoxie
H. 402f (rorek)
tparalogism: *Paralogismus
H. 318 (Kant), 320 n. xix (Kant),
33 2
particular: jeweilig; etc.
tpass along: weitersagen; *nachsagen
(H. 19); weiterreden (H. 168)
H. 155, 16g, 277

555

tpass away: vergehen
(fin. H. 380)
H. 373, 382, 393f, 422f, 4 26f
(See also arising and passing away.)
pass over: übergehen; überspringen
tpast: *Vergangenheit, vergangen
(ftn. H. 326, 380) (4[. H. 328,378,
380, 381 )
H. 20-23, 326, 328, 374, 378-3 81 ,
385f, 39 1, 393-395, 424, 427,
431 (Hegel)
tpatristic theology
H.139
tpattern: Gestalt
But cf. language pattern (Sprachgebild, H. 349)
H. 163, 399f (rorek)
tpayoff: tilgen
H. 242, 307
'
But cf. pay for (*bezahlen, H. 219);
pay one's way (bestreiten, H.
300); etc.

tpeasant's dock: *Bauernuhr
H·4 16
*perceive, perception: vernehmen;
*wahrnehmen
vernehmen:
(ftn. H. 25) (4[. H. 25, 33f, 61f,
346)
H. 25, 33f, 61f, 67, 94, 96-98, 115,
147, 163, 170-172, 212, 224,
273, 335, 346, 35 1, 400 (rorek)
(Note: this list also includes ail
passages in which 'vernehmen' kas
bem translated as 'aware'.)

*wahrnehmen :
(dj. H. 149)
H. 120, 135f, 144, 146f, 149, 181,
217f, 243, 354, 363 n. xxii
tperfunctoriness; Nachsehen
(fin. H. 123)
H. 123
tperish: *verenden
H. 240f, 247, 251
tpermanent: beharrlich (H. 203f) ;
bestiindig (H. 98)
tpersist. persistent: beharren, beharrlich; sich durchhalten; bestehen
bleiben (H. 174) ; anhaltend
(H. 134)
beharren, beharrlich: H. 45, 322f,
373-375
person: *Person; etc.
(4[. H. 4P)
person as object: H. 114

Being and Time
person--cont.
person-Thing: H. 120
practical person: H. 319
God as person: H. 275
personal actions: H. 272
personal Being: H. 47f
personal consciousness: H. 278
personal immortality: H. 320 n. xix
personal pronouns: H. 42, II9
depersonalization: H. 48
personalism: H. 47f, 47 n. ii, 272 n.
vi
Heimsoeth on personality: H. 320 n.
xix
Husserl on personality: H.47, 47 n.
ii
Kant on personality: H. 318f, 320 n.
xix,3 23
Scheler on personality: H. 47f, 272
n. vi, 320 n. xix
Su also H. 22, 38, 46, II9, 137, 274,
278
(Note: this list indudes all passages
of which we have record in which the
Germtln word 'Person' and its
derivatives occur, but does not inetude a'l)' passages in which 'person'
has been used to translate other
expressions. )
t Pharisaism: *Pharisaismus
H. 291,293
phenomenology,
phenomenological:
*Phanomenologie, *phânomenologisch .
(tif. H. 27f, 34f, 37, 357)
H. 27-39 (Section 7), 39, 47, 51 n.
xi, 63f, 89, 115f, 116 n. i, 131,
139f, 147, 159, 180, 184f, 207,
208 n. xvi, 218 n. xxxiv, 219,
249 n. vi, 267, 272 n. vi, 357,
375
See also pre-phenomenological.
phenomenon, phenomenal: *Phânomen, *phanomenal
(fin. H. 29, 303) (tif. H. 28-31, 63)
H. 28-31 (Section 7 A) et passim
See also pre-phenomenal.
tphilological: *philologisch
H. 21, 152
philosophy, philosophical: *Philosophie, *philosophisch
(tif. H. 6, 13, 27, 38, 45, 50 n. x,
208, 21 3,229,3 10,436)
'the business of philosophers' j H. 4,
23, 220 (Kant)

'the scandaI of philosophy': H. 203,
205 (Kant)
philosophy of culture: H. 167
philosophy ofhistory: H. 402 (Torck)
philosophy oflanguage: H. 166
philosophy oflife: H. 46, 48, 398, 403
philosophy of Nature: H. 432 n. xxx
(Hegel)
et passim
tphysics, physical: *Physik, *physisch,
*physikalisch
H. 9, 33, 60, 95f, 204, 206, 218, 361f,
367, 40lf (Torck), 417 n. iv, 419,
428, 431 n. xxx
tphysiology, physiological: *Physiologie, *physiologisch
H. 190, 241, 246f, 402 (Torck)
tpicture: Bild; *ausmalen (H. 262)
(fin. H. 217)
H. 217, 249, 271, 400 (Torck)
place: *Platz. *platzieren; Ort (H,
399, 432 n. xxx) ; Stelle (H. 130)
But cf. dwelling-place (sich aufhalten, H. 119); hiding-place
(Versteck, H. 273); take place
(abspielen, H. 9; sich bewegen,
H. 168).
t*Platz, *platzieren
(ftn. H. 368) (tif. H. 102)
H. 97, 102-104, 107f, II If, 36If.
358,4 13,4 16
plants: *Pflanzen
H.246
tplead one's cause: sich verhandeln
(discuss, H. 27; etc.)
H. 274, 293, 296
tplunge: *Sturz, *stürzen; stossen (H.
2 1 9)
H. 178
See also downward plunge.
poetry: Dichtung
H. 16, 162
point (noun): *Punkt; etc.
H. 105, 107, II9, 179,362,374,4°7,
429f, 432, et passim
tpoint back: zurückweisen (reject);
*rückweisen (H. 291f)
H. 14, 151, 290, 294
tpoint forward: *vorweisen
(fin. H. 291)
H. 280, 291f, 302
point out: aufzeigen; aufweisen
aufzeigen: H. 155-158, 160, 218,
227f, et passim
aufweisen: H. 32f, et passim

Index of English Expressions
tpolitical: *politisch
H. 16, 193,4°0 (Torck)
posit: ansetzen, Ansatz; setzen, mitsetzen; fesùegen (H. 197)
ansetzen, Ansatz: H. 46, 99, 109,
II 4, 147, 204, 208 n. xvi, 229,
291, 373
setzen, mitsetzen: H. 88, 193, 203f,
215, 365, 43°-432 (Hegel)
(Note: except perhaps in the pages on
Hegel, these expressions are by no
means technical termsfor Heidegger,
and we have translated them freely
in other ways.)
position: Stelle, Stellung; Stand; Position (H. 24, 2°4); etc.
Stelle: H. 102-104, 107, 110, 112,
119, 362, 368f, 420, et passim
Stand: H. 7l, 32 l, 415, et passim
positive: *positiv (affirmative, H. 159)
positive sciences, etc.: H. 9- 1l,5 0-5 2,
58, 324, 398
positive vs. privative, negative,
., 1, etc.: H . 19,52, 75, 14 1,
crltlca
260, 279, 286, 378, et passim
positive character of the call of
conscience: H. 279, 294, 300
possibility: *Môglichkeit
(df. H. 143)
p. of an authentic potentiality-for.
H 66
Bemg: . 2 ,343
p. ofconcern: H. 338
p. of Dasein: H. 7r.' 12f, 19f, 42f, 5°,
8 17°,
62, 104, 125, 144, 14,
173, 177f, 181, 187f, 191, 193r. 244,
195, 199, 21 l, 236, 239,
250, 260, 264, 266,2 70, 273 ,
284, 288, 295, 325, 384, 394,
396
p. of 'having' an environment: H.
57f
p. of the impossibility of existence:
H. 250, 262, 265f, 306
p. of irresoluteness: H. 339
p. of nullity: H. 330
p. of the ready-to-hand: H. 187
p. ofrepresentation by another: H.
239f
p. of resoluteness: H. 302
p. ofsight: H. 412
p. of taking action: H. 294
p. oftemporality: H. 304
p. of 'willed' entities: H. 194f
accidental and provisional possibilities: H. 384

existentiell possibilities:
(Section 54), 336f
factical possibilities: H. 264, 299,
383
impossible and possible possibilities:
H. 342
logical possibilities: H. 143
'monumental' possibilities: H. 396
ontical and ontological possibilities:
H. 3 12
traditional possibilities, etc.: H. 383,
385, 391, 394
possibility and actuality: H. 38, 262,
299
p., addiction, and urge: H. 195f
p. and curiosity: H. 347
p. and historiology: H. 394
p., projection, and understanding:
H. 145- 148, 15 1, 194, 260, 27°,
274, 284f, 295, 302, 306, 3 12,
324, 336, 339, 383, 38 7, 394,
397
p. as existentiale
and as category: H.
f
143
Dasein as possibility or Beingpossible: H. 42f, 143- 145, 188,

Being2j~~:r~-death as a possibility

of Dasein: H. 260, 266
Death as a possibility of Dasein: H.
8
66
r.
24 ,25°-2 ,3°2 , 307, 3°9,
disco~~edness as a possibility of
Be'
H 8
mg: . 5
Being towards possibility: H. 262
the blindness of the "they" to possibilities: H. 39 1
the levelling-off of possibilities: H.
194
potentiality-for ... : -kônnen
potentiality-for-Being: *Seinkônnen
(fin. H. 250) (df. H. 86, 144, 285)
authentic potentiality-for-Being: H.
233, 235, 267-3°1 (II, II), 302,
3 13,3 17,3 22 ,343
chosen potentiality-for-Being: H.
288,298,394
existentiell potentiality-for-Being: H.
260,280,3 13,385
factical potentiality-for-Being: H.
145, 18 7, 268, 280, 298, 306•
3 25, 34 1f
ontical potentiality-for-Being: H.
260

Being and Time
potentiality-for-Being-cont.
ownmost potentiality-for-Being: H.
163, 181, 188, 191, 221, 228,
250- 255, 259, 262f, 265, 267,
273, 276-279, 287f, 2g6, 299,
306-308, 3 17, 325, 33 6f, 339,

348

projected potentiality-for-Being: H.
336~ 365
.
(Note: eontrast H. I94, 343, 385,
4°6.)
whole potentiality-for-Being: H. 264,
266, 303, 317
Dasein as potentiality-for-Being:
H. 143, 145, 191, 231, 250, 252,
264f, 277, 284, 287, 312f, 337
Dasein as delivered over to its
potentiality-for-Being: H. 383
Dasein's potentiality-for-Being as an
issue: H. 284, 327
(Note: eontrast H. 3I3.)
potentiality-for-Being as something
for the sake of which: H. 86,
19 1, 193f, 334, 336, 359, 4.12,

414

(Note: eontrast H. I43, 337.)
potentiality-for-Being of üthers: H.
264
tpotentiality-for-Being-guilty: H.
28g,306f
tpotentiality-for-Being-m-the-world:
H. 144, 179, 187, 191f, 228, 252,
295,4 12
tpotentiality-for-Being in the 'truth':
H·3 63
tpotentiality-for-Being-one's-Self: H.
175, 184,267-269,273-275,294,
298,30 7, 3 16, 322f
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole: H.
233- 235, 237, 266, 301-333 (II,
III), 345, 372
(Note: su also H. r!J2, I47f, I53,
I73, 256- 25 8, 334, 359. It
shouId per1ulps be remarked t1ult th8
term 'potentiality-for-Being' is always used in eonnection with SOtmthing of the e1ulracter of Dasein,
whik the term 'possibility', which
often seems intere1ulngeable with it,
is oceasionallY used in a sormw1ult
wider sense.)
power:' Macht; Kraft (force, etc.);
Vermôgen (H. 16, 236)
Macht: H. 275, 278, 296, 310, 384f,
435 (Hegel), et passim

tpractical: *praktisch
But cf. practicable (gangbar, H.
261); practise (Praxis, H. 193 ;
üben, H. 320 n. xix)
(ftn. H. 69)
H. 57, 59, 69, 294, 300, 3 15f, 3 19,
320 n. xix, 357f, 364, 402
(Torek)
tpraxis: Praxis (practise, H. 193)
H. 357f, 402 (Torek)
See also '1Tpâf'r.
tpre-ontological: *vorontologisch
H. 12f, 15-17,44,65,68,72,86, 130,
182-184, 196-200 (Section 42),
197 n. vi, 201, 222, 225, 289,
3 12, 3 15, 356
tpre-phenomenal: *vorphanomenal
H.67
tpre-phenomenological: *vorphanomenologisch
H. 51, 59, 63, 72, 99, 219, 318
tpre-philosophical: *vorphilosophisch
H. 19, 165,219
tpre-predicative: *vorpradikativ
H. 149,359
tpre-scientific:
vorwissenschaftlich
(colloquial, H. 57)
H. 9, 393
tpredicate: *Pradikat
H. 94, 99, 154f, 157, 215, 281, 318,
359
prepare, preparatory, preparation:
*vorbereiten; bereiten; *zubereiten (H. 148);
*Zurüstung(H.151,437);*Praparat
(H. 358); etc.
tpresence: *Anwesenheit; *Zugegensein (H. 75); vor (H. 44)
(fin. H. 25, 326)
*Anwesenheit: H. 25f, 71, 415-418,
423
(See also have presence, presenceat-hand, etc.)
present (adj.): vorliegend; *jetzig;
*zugegen (H. I l 1)
Su also makes present, deprive of its
character as present.)
tPresent (noun): *Gegenwart
(fin. H. 25, 26, 326, 329, 338, 347)
H. 25~ 326, 328f, 337-340, 342, 344348, 350, 355, 360, 363, 365,
369,378-381,385,391,393-395,
397, 40 7f, 4 10, 427, 43 1

Index of English Expressions
present (noun): See in the present.
present (verb): darstellen (represent, H.
94; afford, H. 179); *Vorgabe,
vorgeben; geben; etc.
(ftn. H. 150)
present-at-band,presence-at-han:
d
*vorhanden, *Vorhandenheit
(fin. H. 14, 25, 74, 106) (df. H. 42,
43, 45, 55, 61, 70-74, 88, 183)
preserve: bewabren; *verwahren; etc.
preservation of uncoveredness or discoveredness: H. 172, 224
presupposition: Voraussetzung (prerequisite, H. 110); Vorurteil
(H. 2f)
(df.. H . 22 8, 3 1 4 )
H. 226-330 (Section 44c), et passim
previous: vorgangig, etc.
fprimitive: *primitiv
H. 50-52 (Section Il), 81f, 247, 396,
4 15
primordial: *ursprünglich
(fin. H. 348) (df. H. 231-233, 306,
334)
H. 219-226 (Section 44b ), et passim
priority: Vorrang (*privileged position,
H. 379, 386 ; advantage, H.
207); etc.
p. of the question of Being: H. 2-15
(int. 1)
p. of the problem of man's Being towards God: H. 190 n. iv
p. ofDasein: H. 7f, 13- 16,37,126
p. of existentia over essentia: H. 43
p. of Being-in-the-world as concern:
H. 58
p.of care: H . 198
p. of volition and cognition: H. 136
p. of Dasein's disclosure of itself: H.
136
p. of 'seeing': H. 171, 358
p. of pure intuition: H. 147
p. of the practical attitude: H. 193
p. of 'bad' conscience in interpretations of the conscience: H. 290
p. oftime over space: H. 367 (Kant)
p. of the future: H. 311
p. of the past: H. 379
p. ofhaving-been: H. 386
p. ofmaking-present: H. 4 17
p. of the "now": H. 432 n. xxx
p. of arising and passing away: H.
431f
p. of the present-at-hand: H. 147

559

p. of the concept of Reality: H. 201,
211
p. of the isolated subject: H. 204
p. ofidealism over realism: H. 207
Every priority is suppressed by the
"they": H. 127
(Note: this list includes those passages
in which 'Vorrang' kas been translated as 'privileged position' or as
'advantage'. Th8 word 'prior' kas
been used JreelY in translating
'vorliegen', 'vorgangig', and other
expressions. )
tprivation, privative: *Privation,
*privativ
(fin. H. 58)
H 8
8
6 f.
. l ,29, 50, 5 , 75, 14 1, 149, 1 3,
184, 194, 201, 222, 246, 285f,
29 1,357,378
process of having been
(See have been.)
produce: herstellen (product, H. 7 1;
restore, H. 99)
production ofclocks: H. 4 14f
production of the ready-to-hand:

prod~~ti~~1~(~i~: H. 80f

production of work: H. 67, 69-7 1,

I l 7, 353
production and creation: H. 24, 92
production as mode of Being-in: H.
56, 61
et passim
progress, progression: Fortschritt, fortschreiten (advance); Fortgang
(H. 388)
H. 434 (Heael),
et passim
b
fProjection: *Projektion
(ftn. H. 12 4)
H. 124
project, projection: *entwerfen,
*Entwurf
(fin. H. 124, 245, 285,315) (df.
H. 145, 147, 199, 221, 262,
284f, 324, 336)
projection of Dasein: H. 270, 277,
284,313,363,385,394,406
(Note: see also self-projection.)
p. of Dasein's Being: H. 145, 147,
195,324
p. of existence: H. 325, 372
p. of Being-in-the-world: H. 147
p. of authentic Being-towards-death:
H. 237, 260-267 (Section 53)

560

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

project---cont.

p. of anticipation: H. 266f
p. of resoluteness: H. 385
p. of understanding: H. 148, 151,
174, 265,3 24
p. of possibilities: H. 298, 312, 383,
394
p. of a potentiality-for-Being: H.
148, 305, 33 6, 365
p. of a meaning of Being: H. 235
p. of a state of Being: 362
p. of involvement: H. 353
p. of a world: H. 195, 394
p. of Nature: H. 362f
p. of an entity encountered: H. 363
p. of the primary 'then': H. 409
p. of.historicality: H. 376
p. of the idea of historiology: H. 393
p. upon its "upon-which": H. 151,
32 4f
p. upon possibilities: H. 145, 147f,
181, 187, 194f, 222, 263, 270,
284, 295, 297, 299, 3 12 , 3 15,
339, 383, 385, 38 7, 394
p. upon a potentiality-for-Being:
H. 194, 262f, 265, 277, 287, 306,
3 13, 334, 343, 385,4°6
p. upon a "for-the-sake-of-which":
H. 145, 147, 334
p. upon a "for-the-sake-of-oneself":
H·3 2 7
p. upon significance: H. 145, 147,
15 1
p. upon the world: H. 151
p. upon meaning: H. 151, 324
p. upon Being: H. 312,393
p. upon one's Being-guilty: H. 296f,
301, 305, 382 , 385
p. upon one's potentiality for becoming guilty: H. 287, 306
existential projection: H. 301, 305,
323, 37 6, 38 3
ontological projection: H. 3°2, 309,
3 12 , 393
understanding projection: H. 314f
self-projection: H. 276, 287, 382f,
385f , 387
resolute projection: H. 386
thrown projection: H. 148, 223, 285
null projection: H. 285, 287f
inauthentic projection: H. 339
factical projection: H. 297
See also H. 313, 330, 336, 360
pronoun
(See personal pronouns.)

proof, prove: Beweis (evidence; demonstrate, H. 90), *beweisen;
erweisen (demonstrate; turn
out); etc.
Beweis, *beweisen: H. 152, 201,
202-208 (Section 43a), 229, 269,
310, 315, et passim
tproperty: *Eigenschaft
(ftn. H. 83) (4[. H. 42, 83, 88, 133)
H. 20,42, 56f, 60, 73, 83, 88, 9of, 94,
133, 151, 157 f, 162, 179, 199,
225, 285, 306, 359, 361
proposition: Satz (sentence; principle;
etc.)
H. 18f, 62, 218 n. xxxiv, 349, et
passim

provisional: *vorHiufig
(fin. H. 302)
proximal, proximally: zunachst
(fin. H. 6, 13) (dI. H. 335, 370)
tpsychical: *psychisch; seelisch (soul,
H. 48); Seelen- (soul)
*psychisch:
psychical vs. physical: H. 60, 204,
206, 218, 419
psychical elements and atoms: H. 46
psychical occurrences: H. 33, 367
psychical processes: H. 56, 216f, 293
psychical phenomena: H. 139
psychical time: H. 349
ontico-psychical: H. 299
psychical transposition: H. 400
(Torck)

the 'psychical' vs. acts: H. 47
(Scheler)
psychical Being vs. personal Being:
H. 48 (Scheler)
positive science of the psychical:
H·398
seelisch; Seelenpsychical conditions: H. 136f, 273,
34°
psychical faculties: H. 271f
psychicallife: Seelenleben (life of the
soul, H. 46)
H. 124
tpsychologism: *Psychologismus
H. 21 7
tpsychology, psychological: *Psychologie, *psychologisch
psychology of conscience; H. 290
p. ofdeath and dying: H. 239, 247
p. of moods and affects: H. 134, 13 8,
34°
p. of original sin: H. 190 n. iv

psychology---cont.
psychological idealism: H. 207
Dilthey's psychology: H. 46, 209,
398f
Jaspers' psychology: H. 249 n. vi,
301 n. vi
See also H. 16, 45-50 (Section 10),
51,109,124,163
public, publicness: *ôffentlich, *6ffentlichkeit
(4[. H. 127f, 138)
publicness of the "they": H. 138,
16 7, 175, 188, 190, 192, 257,
273
publicness ofBeing with one another,
etc.: H. 174, 239, 252, 370, 387f
ambiguity of publicness; H. 299
public idle talk: H. 277
publicness of the "to-day": H. 397
public intelligibility: H. 410
public interpretation, etc.: H. 169,
174, l77f, 187, 190, 220, 252254, 27 of, 273, 383
public "at-home": H. 189
public environment: H. 126, 354,
359,4 13
public world: H. 65, 71
public time: H. 411-43°, 424-426
public conscience: H. 278, 403

tquantify: *quantifizieren
H. 99, 305, 412
tquantitative: *quantitativ
H. 98, 106 362, 432 n. xxx
question: *Frage; etc.
radiate
(See emanate.)
trapture: Entrückung
(fin. H. 338, 339)
H. 338f, 348, 350, 365, 396
(Note: this list also includes al! passages
in which 'Entrückung' has been
translated by 'carry away'.)

rational animal
(fin. H. 25)
(Note: see entries for 'animal rationale'
and ~'Î'0v .\6yov Ëx ov in glossaries of
Latin and Greek expressions.)

tput up with: *aushalten
H. 261, 325

trationalism: *Rationalismus
H. 136, 320 n. xix
read off: ablesen (discern; etc.)
ready: bereit; gefasst auf; etc.
bereit:
tready for anxiety: H. 296f, 301,
382 , 385, 39 1
tready for the appeal: H. 287f, 307
tgefasst auf: H. 60, 236
ready-to-hand: *zuhanden
(fin. H. 25, 74, 104, 106) (4[. H. 69,
71,83,87,88, 117, 144)
tReal, Reality: real (realia, H. 68),
*Realitat
(4[. H. 183,211 j contrast H. 128)
H. 7, 47 n. ii, 68, 94 (Kant), 106f,
128, 170, 177, 183f, 200-212
(Section 43),216-218,23°,3°3,
313f, 318, 320 (Kant), 324, 368,
400 (Torck), 420, 437
real: eigentlich
(fin. H. 5, 4 2 )
trealism: *Realismus
H.34, 183,206-208,208 n. xvi, 215
realm: *Region, *regional
(fin. H. 103)
reason:
*Vernunft,
vernünftig
(rational); Grundj etc.
(fin. H. 25, 34)
H. 4, 22f, 32, 34, 48, 165,320 n. xix,

tquality; qualitative: Qualitat; *qualitativ
H. 98f, 282, 285, 295, 297, 333, 43 2
JeX,434

recapitulate
(See repeat.)
treckon: rechnen
H. 284, 293, 333

(Torck)

public law: H. 282
public norms: H. 288
public opinion: H. 403 (Torck)
See also: H. 174, 19°,371.
(Note: see also 'make public'.)

tpunctuality: *Punktualitat
H. 429f, 432 (Hegel)
tpunishable: *strafbar
H. 282f
put forward
tput forward casually: *hinwerfen
(H·3 11 )
that which is put forward in the
assertion: das Ausgesagte: H.
62, 154f, 157,218
(Note: this list includes one passage in
which 'das Ausgesagte' is translated
as 'what has been asserted'.)

et passim

Being and Time
reckon-cont.
reckon on: *rechnen auf
H. 356, 412f
reckon up: *verrechnen
(fin. H. 3°°)
H. 207, 283, 288f, 292, 294, 300,
406
reckon with: *rechnen mit
H. 125, 235, 333, 356, 37 1, 404,
411-413,420,422
take into one's reckoning: *Rechnung tragen
H. 71, 81, 83, 103, 290, 356, 371,
404f, 4 11,4 13
(Note: this List also includes all
passages in which '&chnung tragen'
has been translated as 'take account'.)
time-reckoning: *Zeitrechnung
H. 235, 333, 41 If, 414-418, 4 18
n.v
recur: *wiederkehren
H. 391 f, et passim
refer: verweisen
(See assign.)
reflect, reflection: *Reflexion, *reflektieren; *Widerschein; etc.
t*Refiexion, *reflektieren: H. 48, 60,
115, 136
tregion: *Gegend
(fin. H. 103) (dI. H. 103, 110, 368)
H. 79, 103f, 107f, 110-112, 140,
185f,368f
regulate: regeln (control); *regulieren,
*regulativ; richten (direct)
tregulate oneself according to: sich
richten nach
H. 128,4°4, 41 l, 416, 419f
(Note: this list also includes two
passages in which this expression kas
been translated by 'direct'.)
treify: *verdinglichen
H. 46, 420, 437
trejoin, rejoinder: *erwidern
(fin. H. 386)
H. 28,386
tRelation: *Relation
H.87f
relate, relation, relationship: bezieheI).,
*Beziehung, Bezug; verhalten,
*Verhaltnis
(fIn. H. 4, 340 12 4) W· H. 77)
r. between caller and called: H. 274
r. between phenomenon and logos:
H·54

r. between subject and Object
(See Object.)
r. between intellectus and res: H. 216
r. between ideal content and Real
Object: H. 216
r. between ideal content and act of
judgment: H. 216
r. between knowing and known :
H.218
r. between assertion and entities
uncovered: H. 224
r. between sign and reference: H.
82
r. between man and the world: H.
57
r. between soul and world: H. 59
r. between life and death: H. 249 n.
vi (DiltJv,y)
Dasein's relationship to itself: H. 125,
433
Dasein's relationship to Others: H.
120,25°
agreement as a relation: H. 21 5f
hinding and separating as relations:
H. 159
indicating as a relation: H. 215
reference as a relation: H. 77f
location relationships: H. 54
spatial relationships: H. 54, 112
relationships of Being: H. 54f, 57,
60,62, 122, 124f, 168, 17°,208
n. xvi, 209f, 238
relationships of involvement: H. 355,
359, 361
'relation' as a meaning of "&ros: H.
32, 34, 159f
tnon-relational: *unbezüglich
H. 250-260, 263-265, 280, 307,
3°9,337
defining of relationships: H. 400f
(Torck)
trelative, relativity: *relativ, *Relativitat
H. 9, 22, 93, 97, 105, 227, 261, 290,
398,4°1,417 n. iv
remember: erinnern
(fin. H. 339)
H. 290, 339, 343, et passim
remote: entfernt
(See desever.)
remove: entfernen
(See desever.)
trepeat: wiederholen
(fIn. H. 308 , 339, 385, 386) (df.
H. 339, 385, 386, 295)

Index of English Expressions
repeat--cont.
repetition of the analysis of Dasein:
H. 17, 234, 304f, 331-333
(Section 66)
repetition of possibilities: H. 343,
385f, 39of, 395f
repetition of the question of Being:
H. 2-4 (Section 1),8,26
repetition of what has been ontically
discovered: H. 51
r. and anticipation: H. 391
r. and destiny: H. 386
r. and fate: H. 386, 39of, 395
r. and the future: H. 386, 397
r. and having-been: H. 339, 343f,
350, 39 l, 394f. 397
r. and resoluteness: H. 308, 386, 392,
396
(Note: this List includes ail passages
in which 'wiederholen' kas bem
translated as 'restate', 'recapitulate',
'raise again', 'over again', and
'revive'. See also H. 180.)
trepentance: *Reue
H. 190 n. iv
treport: *berichten, Bericht (record,
H. 394) ; konstatieren (H. 296)
H. 39, 140, 158,277,320 n. xix
represent, representation: vorstellen,
*Vorstellung; vertreten; *reprasentieren; darstellen (H. 94)
(ftn. H. 217,239,3°0)
vorstellen, *Vorstellung: H. 33, 62,
139, 154, 159, 203f, 214, 217f,
3 19, 321 , 354, 359, 36 7-369,
4 10, 424, 430 (Note: cf. also
H. 139.)
tvertreten: H. 59,82, 126, 239f, 242,
253
treproach: vorwerfen
(fin. H. 145)
H.29 1
treprove: *rügen
H. 279, 29°- 29 2, 294
require, requirement: fordern (demand; etc.) ; verlangen (demand
etc.); bedürfen; etc.
Forderung: H. 282f, et passim
research: forschen, Forschung; nachforschen, Nachforschung
H. 9-1 l, 19, 315, et passim
reserve: *vorbehalten; belegen (H.
368); *Reserve (H. 122)
(ftn. H. 368)

treside: wohnen
(fin. H. 54)
H. 54, 68, 188, 385
tresign oneself: *sich abfinden
H. 152, 355f
tresist,
resistance:
*Widerstand,
*Widerstandigkeit,
*widerstehen; widerstreben (H. 88,
246)
H.2,9 1,96f, 137,2°9-211, 3°0,356
tresolve, resolute, resolution: *entschliessen, *entschlossen, *Entschluss
(fin. H. 297, 299, 300) (df. H. 270,
296, 298, 3° 1, 305, 329, 382,
39 1f)
H. 166,235,267-301 (11,11; esp. H.
297-301), 3°2-3°4, 3°5-310
(Section 62), 313, 316f, 322f,
325-33 1, 335-339, 342-345, 349,
363, 38 2-38 7, 39°-39 2, 394-397,
404, 4 10, 4 24
tresponsible, responsibility: schuldig,
Schuld, schuld
(fin. H. 280)
H.282f
rest: Ruhe (tranquillity, H. 254, 430);
ruhen; beruhen; etc.
H. 172, 178, 303
(See also tranquil, take a rest.)
trestless, restlessness: *unruhig, U nruhe (disturbing, H. 2)
H. 172, 398, 434
restate: wiederholen
(See repeat.)
retain, retention, retentive: behalten;
erhalten (H. 204)
H. 62, 339, 353-356, 359-361, 368,
388, 39 1, 4°6-409, 413f, 416,
420f, et passim
tretell: *weitersagen
H. 155, 169, 277
treticence: *Verschwiegenheit
H. 165, 174, 273, 277, 296f, 301,
305, 322f, 382, 385
reveal: enthüllen,
H. 307, et passim
reverse: umkehren; *rückgangig (H.
268)
H. 426, et passim
right away
(See not right away.)
tripeness, ripen: *Reife, *reifen
(fin. H. 244)
H.243 f

Being and Time
trornanticism: "'Romantik
H.65
troom: "'Zimmer (H. 68), Raum (H.
1°3)
(See also make room.)
tthe "round-abo,\t-us": "'das Dm-unsherum
H. l03
tround out: "'erganzen
H. 53, 99f, 13 1, 148, 255, 3 16
run: laufen; etc.
(fin. H. 243)
trun ahead: "'vorauslaufen (H. IO)
(fin. H. 262, 264, 302)
trun away: "'entlaufen (H. 347)
(fin. H. 347)
trun its course: ablaufen, Ablauf;
verlaufen, Verlauf; abspielen
(H.80)
verlaufen, Verlauf
(ftn. H. 243)
H. 243, 355, 36 7, 404, 410, 4 28
ablaufen, Ablauf
H. 18, 176, 291, 293, 3 27, 340, 349,
36 7,388,425
(Note: this list includes ail passages in
which 'Ablauf' and 'ablaufen' OCCUT,
regard/ess qf how they are translated; the list for 'Verlauf' and
'verloufen', however, is con.fined to
those passages in which these are
translated as 'run its course'.)
tsaid-in-the-talk: "'das Geredete
H. 162, 164, 168, 272f
sake
(See 'for-the-sake-of-which'.)
say: sagen; etc.
(4[. H. 16g)
saying and discourse: H. 32, 162,
164f
s. and keeping silent: H. 165
s. and speaking: H. 160
s. and understanding: H. 168f, 173
s. without audible or explicit utterance: H. 406, 408, 416, 422
'what conscience says': H. 269, 280
saying "1": H. 318f, 321-323
saying "now", etc.: H. 406, 408, 416,
418,421f
(Note: 'sagen' and its compounds
have been translated informally in
many other ways, and the verb 'say'
has been used no less informally in
translating other expressions.)

tthe 'scandaI of philosophy'; ""der
Skandal der Philosophie'
H. 203, 205 (Kant)
tscent: Spur (trail, H. 281), "'spüren
H. 173f
(Note: the derivatÏVI verbs 'oufspüren'
and 'nachspüren' Mve bem translated
as 'trtU:k down' in H. 94, 146.)
tscepticism: "'Skeptizismus, "'Skepsis
H. 203, 228f, 400 (Torck)
tschema, schematic: "'Schema, tschematisch
H. 78, 132,27°,332, 359f, 365, 398
tschematism: "'Schematismus
H. 23,4°
tscholasticism, Schoolmen: "'Scholastisk, scholastisch
H. 22, 25, 93, 139
science; scientific: "'Wissenschaft, wissenschafùich ("'scholarly, H. 32;
learned, H. 171)
(4[. H. 9, II, 13, 28, 50 n. x, 52,
62, 152,357, 362f, 393)
s. of Being: H. 26, 230
s. ofhistory: H. 375f, 378, 392, 397f,
4°4
s. oflanguage: H. 165f, 349
s. oflife: H. 49
s. of Nature: H. 404
(Note: see aiso 'natural science'.)
s. of phenomena: H. 31
s. of the present-at-band: H. 324
s. of the psychical: H. 398
s. of the ready-to-hand: H. 361
s. of the truth: H. 213
s. of man, society, and the state: H.
398
factical s.: H. 392f
factual s.: H. 362
humane sciences
(Note: see entry above.)
natural science
(Note: see entry under 'Nature'.)
theoretical science: H. 358
existential genesis of s.: H. 171, 358
existential conception of s.: H. 357
logical conception ofs.: H. 357
Objectivity ofscience : H. 395
theory of science: H. 45, 375f, 398,
4°1
ethics as a science: H. 402 (Torck)
scientific attitude (or hehaviour): H.
358 , 361
scientific projection: H. 363
SeealsoH. 45, 138, 153,4oo,etpassim

Index of English Expressions
seize upon: ergreifen
tscribbling: "'Geschreihe
(Note: the foilowing list includes the
H. 169
chief passages in which 'ergreifen'
see: sehen; sichtbar; etc.
has been translated as 'seize upon',
(ftn. H. 69, 171) (4[. H. 147,
'take hold of', or 'grasp'.)
346)
'ergreifen' of possibilities or potentialseeing Being-in-the-world: H. 58
ities: H. 20, 38, 86, 144, 153,
seeing colours: H. 33
195, 268, 299, 302 , 342, 344,
seeing entities in their Being: H. 45
347, 38 3, 369f
seeing everything: H. 177
· ". of one's own Dasein: H. 122, 188
seeing Experiences: H. 119
• .. of the Self: H. 129
seeing the hammer: H. 155
· .. of the disclosedness of Being-inseeing 'ideas': H. 226
the-world: H. 146
seeing possibilities: H. 148
· .. ofBeing-with: H. 162
seeing the ready-tQ-hand: H. 149
· .. of everydayness: H. 179
seeing the Things which are closest:
· .. ofbeing guilty: H. 291
H.149
· .. of the finitude of one's existence:
seeing something wrongly: H. 281
H·3 84
seeing the 'world' merely as it looks:
· .. of sornething not specified: H. 12,
H.172
126, 273, 326
seeing in which one 'merely' under· .. of an entity as something to he
stands: H. 149
concerned with: H. 194
seeing as a distance-sense: H. 1°7
· .. ofeverything: H. 173
'seeing' as made possible by cleared· .. ofa tradition: H. 2of
ness: H. 351
· .. of the problem of existence: H.
'seeing' as determined by the "they" :
235 n. i
H. 170, 126f
· . . of historiology as a science: H.
seeing and curiosity: H. 170-173
33 2
(Section 36), 346-348
· .. of phenomenology: H. 38
the care for seeing: H. 171
· .. of the "for-the-sake-of-which":
the desire to see: H. 170
.
H.193
the priority of 'seeing': H. 358
Self:
"'Selbst
the mutual sharing which sees: H.
(ftn. H. 1I4, 303, 375.) (See also our
155
entryfor 'Selbst' in the Glossary.)
St. Augustine on seeing: H. 17 1
(4[. H. 1I7, 267, 273, 284, 303,
see in advance
303, 3 18 , 323, 33 2)
(See fore-sight.)
Self as a way of Dasein's Being: H.
let be seen
117
(See entry for this expression above.)
existentiality of the S.: H. 267, 318,
(See also H. 351, et passim. The verb
322
'see' has been used informally in
S. as the "who" of Dasein: H. I l 4,
translating several expressions. The
2 67
above list includes only passages in
S. of everyday Dasein: H. 129. 193,
which sorne form of the verb
252, 273 (See also they-self.)
'sehen' occurs, and is confined to
S. as a constitutive item in Being-inthose which are of sorne philosophical
the-world: H. 190, 200, 220,
interest.)
273,297 (Cf H. 146.)
seek: suchen (search; try; etc.); wollen
S. as authentic or inauthentic: H.
(want; will; insist; etc.)
129f, 181,317,332,433 (Hegel)
seem: "'scheinen, scheinbar (semblant,
Dasein's own or ownmost Self: H.
H. 29); Schein (H. 176); etc.
129, 253, 268, 271, 273, 280,
But cf. seem strange (befremden,
288, 295, 339
fremdartig anmuten)
Being-one's-Self
(fin. H. 29) (df H. 29)
(Se, entry for this expression above.)
seize hold of: "'zugreifen, "'Zugriff

566

Being and Time

Self-cont.
potentiality-for-Being-one's-Self
(See entryfor this expression above.)
s. as disinterested spectator: H. 293
S. as subject or substance: H. 129f,
317,320 n. xix, 323, 332
(See also subject and substance.)
Self and the "1": H. 129f, 317-323,
348
Self-Thing: H. 323
S. as thrown: H. 277,284,339,383
S. as lost in the "they": H. 271, 274,
383 (Cf. H. 116, and see theyself.)
S. as factically existing: H. 419
selfsameness of the Self: H. I I 4, 130,
320,373
constancy, inconstancy, and nonSelf-constancy of the Self
(See entry above under 'constant'.)
failure to stand by one's Self
(See entry for this expression above.)
t Self-subsistence: *Selbstlindigkeit
(fin. H. 29 1, 303, 322, 375)
H. 303, 332 (Cf. H. 29If.)
S. and the Other: H. 124, 128 (Cf.
also they-self.)
S. as being-ahead-of-itself: H. 193
S. and care: H. 193, 304, 316-323
(Section 64)
S. and the cali of conscience, etc.:
H. 273f, 277, 280, 288, 296
S. and resoluteness: H. 298, 300, 310,
39 1
S. and rapture: H. 348
Dasein's understanding of the S.: H.

72

(See entry under 'self' below.)
'knowledge of the Self': *"Selbsterkenntnis"
(fin. H. 124, 146)
H.146
The S. must lay the basis for itself:
H. 284
The S. must forget itself: H. 354
Hegel on the S.: H. 433f
Kant on the S.: H. 318-321, 320 n.
xix,323
rorck on the consideration of the Self:
H. 399, 401
self, oneself, itself: selbst; Selbst-(in
certain compounds) ; sich
tself-consciousness: *Selbstbewusstsein
H. 401 (rorck), 435 (Hegel)

tself-dissection: *Selbstzergliederung
H.178
self-evidence: Selbstverstandlichkeit
(obviousness)
H·4, 16,43,49,93, et passim
self-forgetful: selbstvergessen
H. 322, 424 (Cf. also H. 277, 342,
354·)
self-interpretation, interpretation of
the Self, etc.: *selbstauslegung
H. 51, 116, 184, 196f, 200, 312, 318
self-subsistent: *selbstlindig
(ftn. H. (91)
H. 291f (Su entry for 'Self-subsistmee' above.)
(Note: this list ineludes onry a few of
the more interesting expressions in
which 'self', 'oneseif', etc. appear.)
tselfsame: *selbig
(fin. H; 114)
H. 114, 130, 188, 2 lB, 320, 322, 373,
4 23,435
tsemblance: Schein
H. 29-32, et passim
tsense (verb), sensation: *empfinden;
*Sinnlichkeit (H. 97)
H. 137, 152, 163f
sense (noun): Sinn
But cf. common sense' (*Verstandigkeit).
(fin. H. l, 137)
H. 91, 96, 107, 137, 147
(Note: cf. our entry for 'meaning' above
and our glossary-entry for 'Sinn'.
This list ineludes onry passages referring ta 'senses' such as vision or
touch, not ta the 'senses' of words or
other expressions.)
sentence: Satz
separation: Trennung (distinguishing;
etc.); Scheidung (distinguishing,
division, etc.)
H. 159,217, et passim
sequence: Folge; *Abfolge
s. of days: H. 371
s. of Experiences: H. 29 1, 293, 355,
373. 38 7f, 390
s. of "nows": H. 329, 373, 409, 4224 26, 43 1f
s. of processes: H. 379
s. ofresolutions: H. 387
tserviceability: *Dienlichkeit
(fin. H. 78)
H.68, 78,82-84,137,144

Index of English Expressions
serviceability--cont.
(Note: the verb 'serve' has been used
informolry ta translate 'dienen' and
several other expressions.)
tset our sights towards: *anvisieren
H. 15,61, 150, 157
tsettle: abschliessen
H. 175, 179,236,239,4°5
shape: Gestalt
H·9 0f,112
share: teilen
H. 118, 155, 162, 164
tshift: verlegen
H. 355, 357
tshorn: beschnitten (curtailed, H. 316)
H. 422, 426f
show: zeigen; etc.
(fin. H. 29, 77, 122, 178, 304)
show itself: H. 28-31, 35f, 57, 63,
67 f. 72f, 97, 137f, 140, 155, 173,
213, 218f, 222, 361, 421, et
passim
(Note: see also our entry for 'indicate'
above.)
tshrink back: *zurückweichen; zurückziehen (withdraw)
H. 23, 127, 185
tside-by-side: *nebeneinander
H. 55, 68, 97, 173, 175,43°
tsight (verb): sichten (sift, H. 51, 394)
H. 33,45,75, 146,312,359,421
sight (noun): Sicht; etc.
But cf. set our sights towards (*anvisieren).
(ftn. H. 6g, 1(3) (df. H. 146,
147, 170)
H. 69, 74f, 133f, 146-149, 16 7, 170,
173, 336, 347, 358, 4 12
sign: Ziechen; etc.
H. 76-83 (Section 17), 108,215
significance, significant: *Bedeutsamkeit; Bedeutung
(fin. H. 87) (df. H. 87, 12 3, 143,
192, 297, 364)
*Bedeutsamkeit: H. 83-88 (Section
18), 104, 1lOf, 12 3, 12 9, 143148, 151, 158, 166, 186f, 192,
210, 297, 334, 364-3 66, 4 14,
4 22f,4 27
tBedeutung:H. 28, 51, 139, 198
(Note: see also our entry for 'insignificanee' above.)
signification,
signify:
Bedeutung,
*bedeuten
(fin. H. l, 87) (df. H. 161, 166)

56 7

But cf. double signification (Doppel
deutigkeit, H. (02); has many
significations (vieldeutig, H. 32)
H. 77f, 77 n. ii, 87, 93, 150, 157, 165f,
168, 188, 349, 369
silent
(See keep silent.)
simplicity: Einfachheit, *Simplizitllt
Einfachheit: H. 318, 322, 384, et
passim
t*Simplizitlit: H. 318 (Kant), 323
(Kant)
tsin: *Sünde
H. 180, 190 n. iv, 306 n. ii
tSituation: Situation
(fin. H. 299) (df. H. 232, 299)
H. 158, 189, 232f, 235, 299f, 302,
304, 307, 310-316 (Section 63),
326, 328, 338, 347, 349, 360,
382,384,391,397,410
(Note: see note on 'situation' below.)
tsituation: *Lage
But cf. limit-situation (*Grenzsituation).
(fin. H. 299)
H. 110, 193, 226, 299f, 359, 36 9, 37 1
(Note: in H. 369 and 371, where the
words 'Lage' and 'Situation' appear
together in the German, we have
simpry used 'situation' and indicated
the German reading.)
sketch: vorzeichnen (prescribe, delineate, outline, etc.); *skizzieren
(H. 43, 51 n. xi) ; Zeichnung (H.
398 )
(fin. H. 3 1 5)
solicitude: Fürsorge
(fin. H. 121) (df. 121f, 193, 3 18)
H. 121-124, 131, 143, 146, 17 6 , 193f,
238, 253, 263, 266, 268, 289300, 318
tsoli1oquy: *Selbstbesprlich
H. 273f, 401 (rorek)
tsolipsism: *Solipsismus
H.188
something: etwas; etc.
Being-something: H. 16o
something as something: H. 149f,
159, 359f
The world is the most primordial
'something'. H. 187
tsoul: Seele
H. 14,23,46,48,59, 114, 117,202,
214, 318, 402 (rorek), 405, 4 2 7

568

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

soul-cont.
(Note: see also OUT entry for 'psychical'
above, and the quotations from
Aristotle and Augustine translated
in Heidegger's footnotes xiv and xv
on H ..pq.)

spatio-temporal: H. 362, 367
tgiving space: *Raum-geben: H. 111
ttaking space in: *Raum einnehmen:
H·3 68f
tspatializing: *verraumlichen: H.
108, 112, 418
tstretch of space: *RaUInstrecke:
H. 106,418
tspace between: *Zwischenraum:
H·55
tworld-space: H. 54, 204
tspatially-Iocal: *raUIn1ich-ôrtlich:
H·4 1 7
Bergson on space: H. 18, 333, 432 n.

source: *Ursprung; Quelle; etc.
(fin. H. 348)
H. 334, et passim
tsouth wind: *Südwind
H.80f
space, spatial: Raum, *raumlich
(fin. H. I I l, 368) (dj. H. 56, 112,
429 (Hegel) )
H. 9, 18,31,54-56,66,68,79,89,
xxx
101-113 (l, III, C), 119f, 132,
Descartes on space: H. 89
14 1,166,186,299,333,335,367Hegel on space: H. 429f, 432 n.
369 (Section 70), 416-418, 429f
Kant on space: H. 89
(Hegel), 432 n. xxx
tspan: spannen, *Spanne
spatiality of Dasein: H. 56, 89, 10 I(fin. H. 409)
113 (l, III, C), 119f, 132, 141,
H. 373f, 409, 4 14, 416, 423f
299, 335, 36 7-369 (Section 70) speak, speech: sprechen; etc.
spatiality of the "there" : H. 132, 299
H. 32, 160, et passim
spatiality of Being-in-the-world: H.
tspeak
again:
*nachsprechen
79, 101, 104-110 (Section 23),
(H. 224); *weitersprechen (H.
14 1, 299
224)
spatiality of Being-in: H. 54, 105f,
tspeak forth: *Heraussage
186
H. 155, 160
spatiality of the world: H. 101, 1lOtspeak out: aussprechen
112,369
(ftn. H. 149, 167, 224)
spatiality of the 'world': H. 112
H. 16 7f
spatiality of the environment: H. 60,
(Note: see also our entry for 'express'
66,89, 112
above.)
spatiality of entities encountered in tsphere: *Sphare
the environment: H. 101
inner sphere: H. 60, 62
spatiality of the ready-to-hand:
'sphere' of the Real: H. 202
H. 102-104 (Section 22), 110,
'sphere' of the subject: H. 216
112,418
sphere of Being-outside-of-itself: H.
spatiality of extended Things: H.
429 (Hegel)
112f, 368
tspirit; spiritual: Geist, geistig
spatial positions: H. 102, 107, 119,
H. 22, 46, 47 n. ii (Husserl), 48, 56,
. 368f
89, 117, 152, 198, 320 n. xix
tspatial receptacle: *Raumgefass:
(Hegel), 368, 379, 395, 397, 4°1,
H.loi
(rorck), 404, 405f (Hegel), 427,
spatial significations: H. 166, 299,
428-436 (Section 82)
369
(Note: bath 'Geist' and 'geistig' have
space in itself: H. 112
occasionally been translated as
tspace of Nature: *Naturraum:
intellectual, and 'GeisteswissenH.112
schafi' always becomes 'humane
pure space, eu.: H. 112
science.')
space and region: H. 1lOf, 186, 368f spring from: entspringen
space and time, spatiality and tem(ftn. H. 347)
porality: H. 18, 31, 333, 335,
H. 334, 344, et passim
36 7-3 69 (Section 70), 416-418, *sta-:
429f (Hegel)
(fin. H. 303, 322; cffin. H. 117)

stand: stehen; etc.
(fin. H. 117,3°3, 322)
stand before

569

But cf structural e1ement (*Auf-

(See our entry for 'impend' above.)

stand by itself
(See our entry for 'failure ta stand by
itself'·)

stand out: abheben (contrast; bring
out; comparison); herausheben
(H. 118)
But cf outstanding (ausstehen,
*Ausstand), andftn. H. 250
tstandard: *Massstab; *massgebend
(H. 160, 165)
H. 268, 395,417
state: Verfassung: *Staat (H. 398, 403)
But cf state of afi'airs: *Sachlage:
H. 51, 158
(ftn. H. 8)
constitutive state: Verfassung
state of Being: Seinsverfassung
state-of-mind: *Befindlichkeit, befindIich, sich befinden
(fin. H. 134, 137, 328) (dj. H. 133,
134, 136f, 190, 276, 328, 346,
350 )
H. 133, 134-148 (Sections 29-31),
184-191 (Section 40), 339-346
(Section 68 b), et passim
statement: *Aussagesatz: etc.
H.157 f
tsteadiness: *Bestandigkeit, bestandig;
*statigkeit
(fin. H. 423)
H. 320, 322, 39of, 398
(Note: the adjective 'steat!y' has occlfS-

bauelement, H. 334) ; substructure (*Unterbau, H. 210;
*Substruktion, H. 241)
tas-structure: *Als-struktur, *Struktur des AIs
H. 149, 15 1, 154, 158, 359f
t care-structure, structure of care:
*Sorgestruktur
H. 196, 259, 3 17, 323, 328, 33 1f,
346,350
tend-structure: *Ende-struktur
H. 244, 246
fore-structure
(See our entry above.)

translatmg

ttemporalization-structure: *Zeitigungsstruktur.
H·33 2
tworld-structure: *Weltstruktur
H. 366,414
structure of Being, Being-structure:
*Seinsstruktur
tstructure of truth: *Wahrheitsstruktur
H. 216, 223, 226
tstructural totality: *Strukturganzheit
H. 131, 182, 193, 209, 234, 334
structural whole: *Strukturganze
H. 65, 131, 180-184 (Section 39),
191f, 231-233, 236, 252, 3 16f,
323-325, 350
See also H. 2-15 (Int. 1), especially
H. 5-8 (Section 2), et passim
subject (noun), subjective: *Subjekt,
*subjektiv
But cf. subject-matter. (See entry

tstill-a-Dasein: *Nochdasein
H.239
stock: Bestand
stop: *aufhôren; etc.
H. 244f, 329f
tstream: *StroIIi;*Fluss
But cf. Ausfluss (effluence, H. 291)
stream of Experiences: H. 194, 344,
388
stream of "nows": H. 410, 422, 426
stream of time: H. 426, 432
tstretch, stretch along: Strecke, erstrecken
H. 23, 106,371,373-375, 390f, 40 9f,
4 1 7f ,42 3
structure, structural: *Struktur, *struktural

below).
(dj. H. 46, 60, 114, 126, 204, 227,
227, 230, 366, 419)
subject vs. Dasein: H. 60 (Contrast
H.229)
subject vs. Self: H. 303, 322
subject vs. Object:
(See Object.)
subjectivity vs. Objectivity: H. 395,
405, 4 11 , 4 19
isolated subject: H. 118, 179, 188,
204, 206, 321
worldless subject: H. 11of, 116, 192,
206,366
subjects ofOthers: H. 119, 121, 123,
126, 128, 384
present-at-hand subject: H. 119,
HlI, 123, 128, 131f, 176, 320

ionally been used
other expressions.)

ln

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time

57°

subject--cont.
'ideal subject': H. 229
absolute subject: H. 228, 318
knowing subject: H. 47, 60
the 'subject' of everydayness: H. 114,
128
'factual' subject: H. 229
factical subject: H. 229
'theoretical subject': H. 316
'historical' subject: H. 382
'logical subject': H. 319 (Kant)
subject vs. predicate: H. 154f, 318f
the a priori and the subject: H. 229
(Cf, H. 110)
truth and the subject: H. 227, 229
time and the subject: H. 419
the world and the subject: H. 62,
109f, 164 (See also worldless
subject.)
subjectivity of the subject: H. 24
'subjectivity' of the world: H. 65,
366
'subjectivity' of time: H. 419, 427
'subjectivity' ofworld-time: H. 419
Kant on the subject: H. 24, 109,2°4,
3 19-3 21
subject-matter: sach(Note: this expression kas been used only
in translating the words 'sachhaltig', 'Sachgebiet', and *'Sachlogile'.)
tsubjectum: *Subjektum; *subjectum
H.46, 114,3 19,322
tsubmit, submission: anweisen, *Angewiesenheit; Sichstellen unter
(H·74)
(fin. H. 87)
H. 87, 137, 139, 161, 297, 348, 383,

41 2

tsubsist, subsistence: bestehen, Bestand
(ftn. H. 303)
H. 7, 153, 216, 272 n. vi, 284, 288,
303, 333, 348, 35 2, 420, 430
(See also entries for 'Self-subsistence'
and 'self-subsistent' above.)
substance, substantial, substantiality:
*Substanz, *substantial, *substantiell, *Substantialitat
But cf. substantiation (Bewahrung, H. 209)
(fin. H. 25, 303) W: H. 87, 89f,
9 2, 94, 3 18)
H. 22, 46f, 63, 68, 87-90, 92-96, 98,
100, 114, 117, 201, 212, 303,

314, 317-323, 320 n. xix, 398,
435
substantial Being: H. 47, 87f
substantiality as basic attribute of
Being: H. 201
ontology of the substantial: H. 319,
320 n. xix
substanceandsubject: H. 2, 317, 321,
332
substance and Self: H. 114,3°3,317,
320 n. xix, 323, 332
substance and the "1": H. 31 7f, 320,
322
substance and person: H. 47, 320 n.
xix
substance and spirit: H. 117
substantiality and Dasein's subsistence: H. 303
soul-substance: H. 46, 114, 318
man's substance: H. 117b, 212, 314
substance and world: H. 90, 94, 96
corporeal substance: H. 90, 92
substance and the present-at-hand:
H. 114,318
substantiality and Reality: H. 212
substance and function: H. 88
Descartes on substance: H. 90, 9296, gB, 100
Kant on substantiality: H. 318-323
Scheler on substances, etc.: H. 47
tsuccession, successive: *Nacheinander;
*Sukzession (H. 432, n. xxx);
*Sich-jagen (H. 322)
*Nacheinander: H. 242, 291, 350,
374, 422 , 4 26, 430
tsuicide: *Selbstmord
H.229
sum, summation, summative: *Summe,
*Summierung, *summativ
H. 125-127, 187,210,242-244, 244n.
iii, 370, 374
tsummon: *Aufruf, *aufrufen
(fin. H. 269, 273)
H. 269, 273-275, 277, 279f, 287,
289f, 292, 294-296, 299f, 3 13,

31 7

tsun: *Sonne
But cf. sunrise (Aufgang, H. 103,
413); sunset (Niedergang H.
413). Cf, also sonnenklar (clarity,
H.2)
H. 71, 103, 412f, 415f, 432 n. xxx
(Hegel)
superficial: ausserlich
(fin. H. 339)

57 1

take back: *zurücknehmen, *ZurücksuperÏor: überlegen (adj.)
nahme
But cf. superior power (*Übermacht,
(fin. H. 308, 344)
.
H. 384f). Cf, also the verb
H. 308, 332, 244, 370, 436, et pamm
'überlegen' ('to deliberate').
take cognizance: Kenntnis nehmen,
H. 254,258
Kenntnisnahme
tsupra-temporal: überzeitlich
But cf. cognize, cognition (erkennen,
H. 18,395
Erkenntnis).
tsurmise: *ahnen
ttake the first cut: *anschneiden (H.
H. 173f, 219
150)
surmount:überwinden
(fin. H. 150)
surprise: verwundern (aInaze, H. 172);
take in: einnehmen: aufnehmen (H.
überraschen (H. 355)
428)
tsurrender: *ausliefern
But cf. take in advance (vorwegnehH. 128, 138f, 144, 178, 185, 199,
men, H. 264)
299.,4 12
(fin. H. 368)
survey: Ubersicht, übersehen (overH·368
look; etc.)
take into one's reckoning
H. 79, 3 15, 359
(See entry under 'reckon' above.)
symbol: *Symbol
take over: übernehmen, Übernahme
H. 29, 77f, 163
symptom: Anzeichen (*betoken, H. ttake a rest: *ausruhen
185); *Symptom (H. 29)
H. 57, 172, 193
But cf. symptom of a disease (Krank- take time
heitserscheinung, H. 29)
(See time.)
(fin. H. 29)
talk
H. 78,80
(See discourse.)
synthesis: *Synthesis, *Synthese
ttarry: *verweilen
H.33f, II7, 159f, 178,430 (Hegel)
H. 61, 120, 138, 172, 220, 238, 346f,
(Note: see also aw8Eols.)
358
system: *System
t tear (verb): reissen
H. 36, 87f, 159, et passim
H. 142, 173f, 178, 193, 222, 236,
tacit: unausdrücklich (unexpressed,
238, 263, 348, 35 1, 383f
not explicit, etc.); unausges(Note: this list includes alt passages in
prochen (unexpressed); *stillwhich 'reissen' and its compounds
schweigend
appear, though they are often
translated by 'match', 'drag', or
take account
'wrench' rather than by 'tear'.)
(See entry on 'ta1ce into one's reckoning' tTemporal, Temporality: *temporal,
under 'reckon' above.)
*Temporalitat
take action: handeln
(fin.
H. 17,23 1)
H. 69, 174, 176, 288, 294f, 300, 302,
H. 19, 23- 26, 39f, 147
310, 3 19, 3 26
.
(Note: this list also includes passages ln temporal, temporality: *zeitlich, *Zeitlichkeit
which 'handeln' is translated by
But cf. temporal attribute, temporal
'action' or soml -flther form of the
character (*Zeitbestimmtheit);
verb 'act'.)
temporal stage (*Zeitstufe, H.
ttake along: mitnehmen
349)
6
H. 108, 172, 268, 273, 345, 348, 3 9
(ftn. H. 17, 304) (dj. H. 17f, 231~'
(Note: this list also includes those pas326, 329, 33 l, 333f, 338 n. 111,
sages in which 'mitnehmen' kas
350, 36 7, 396, 405, 420, 4 26,
bem translated as 'carry atong'.)
6)
43
take apart: auseinanderlegen; *auseinH. 17-19, 21, 39, 41, 199, 204, 23 1andernehmen (H. 159)
437 (Division II; su Table of
(fin. H. 149)
Contents.)
H.149

57 2

Being and Ti71l4

temporalize: zeitigen
theoretical,
theory:
*theoretisch,
(ftn. H. 235, 304) (cif. H. 235, 304,
*Theorie
328,365)
(fin. H. 69) (cif. H. 69, 138, 356ft')
H. 22, 122, 152, 178, 235, 304, 328H. 59, 67, 69, 81, 136, 138, 157f,
340, 342, 344, 348-35°, 25 2-355,
166, 193, 199, 248, 251, 257f,
365f, 375f, 381 , 388, 395-397,
261, 300, 312, 315f, 320 n. xix,
405-4 16, 4 20f, 4 25-427, 43 6f
335, 35 1f, 356-364 (Section
(This list iru:ludes, in its jirst four items,
69b), et passim)
the passages in which ';:;eitigen' has
(Note: for 'theory of judgment', 'theory
been translated as 'bring about' or
of relativiry', etc., see entries for
*' bring to maturiry'.)
'judgment', 'relativiry', etc. But for
tempt: versuchen (try; attempt; etc.);
'theory of knowledge', see 'episteetc.
mology'.)
H. 177f, 180, 253f, 330, 347
the "there": *das Da
ftense (adj.): gespannt
(ftn. H. 135, 239) (cif. H. 119, 132,
(fin. H. 409)
133, 135, 142f, 145, 160, 296f,
H·374
35°,3 64)
ftense (noun): *Tempus
H. 75, 102, 119, 132f, 134-166 (l,
H·349
V, A). 166-180 (l, V, B), 220f,
fterror: *Entsetzen
237, 263, 265, 270, 276, 284,
H.142
296-3° 0, 3 1 l, 326, 334-336,
testimony: Zeugnis
339, 343, 347-35°, 364, 366,
(fin. H. 256)
382, 385, 39 1, 406, 408, 410,
fthe "that-it-is": *das Dass
4 12 f, 4 15
(ftn. H. 135)
(Note: cf. also H. 74, 83, 126f, 186,
189, 195, 238, 328, 365, 389,
H. 135f, 276, 284, 340, 343
fthe 'that it is': *das "Dass es ist"
4 22 , 434 (Hegel». See also
But cf. the fact that it is (*Dass-sein,
entries for 'Being-there', 'haveH. 5, 7, 14)
been-there', 'no-longer-Being-there'.)
(fin. H. 135)
there is: es gibt; etc.
H.134f
(ftn. H. 212,412)
fthe 'that it is and has to be': *das
the 'there is': H. 7, 228
"Dass es ist und zu sein hat"
'There is' something ready-to-hand:
H. 134f, 276, 284
H·7 1
'There is' a world: H. 72
fthe 'that it is there': *das "dass-es-daist"
'Thece is' Being: H. 212, 230, 316
'There i.;' truth: H. 214, 226, 228,
H. 265
'There is' time: H. 41 If.
theme, thematic, thematize: *Thema,
*thematisch, *thematisieren
there-with-us: *mit-da(ftn. H. 2) (cif. H. 363)
H. 13°,25°
H. 2, 4, 9, 3 1, 4 1-45 (Section 9),
(Note: cf. also 'Dasein-with'.)
6
67- 9, 74-76, 83, IlIf, 124, 130- the "they"; *das Man; etc.
134 (Section 28), 145, 149,
(fin. H. 113, 129,253) (cif. H. 114,
238f, 354, 362 -3 65, 376, 393126- 13°, 138, 252, 391, etc.),
397, 422, et passim
publicness ofthe "they" : H. 138, 188,
the "then": *das Dann
190, 192, 252f, 271, 277f
(fin. H. 406)
common sense of the "they": H.
H. 4°6-414, 421f, 427
260, 288, 292, 296, 309, 312,
fthe "thence": *das Dorther
8 7, 395
3
H·3 69
the way Jhings have been interpreted
ftheology: *Theologie
by the "they": H. 190, 252,
H. 10, 28, 34, 48f, 139, 190 n. iv,
258, 273, 309, 33 1
229, 248, 249 n. vi, 269, 272 n.
idle talk of the "they": H. 174,252,
vi, 290, 306 n. 2
255, 277f, 296

Index of English Expressions
the "they"-cont.
ambiguity of the "they": H. 174
tranquillization by the "they": H.
177, 195, 254 "
Being-with-one-another
in
the
"they": H. 175
the Dasein-with of Others in the
"they": H. 176
everyday Being-one's-Self and the
"they" : H. 126-130 (Section
27),252
inauthentic Being (or existence) in
the "they": H. 178f, 367
authentic Being-one's-Self as a modification of the "they": H. 267f,
277
absorption in the "they": H. 167,
184, 189, 222, 270, 315
lostness in the "they": H. 175, 177,
189, 253, 268, 271, 274, 287,
289,297,299, 30 7f, 383, 390
listening away to the "they": H. 271
fleeing into the "they": H. 322
falling and the "they": H. 135, 189,
277, 28 7, 33 1
the "they" as hero: H. 371
the "they" as determining one's
state-of-mind: H. 170, 177,254
passing over the "they": H. 273
the "they" and the calI: H. 296
the "they" and resoluteness: H. 299,
3°7
the "they" and the Situation: H. 300
the "they" and repetition: H. 391
the "they" and death: H. 252-255,
257, 263, 266, 424f.
the "they" and time: H. 41 l, 425
(See also: H. 167, 193, 224, 278,
298, 318.)
fthey-self: *Man-selbst
(fin. H. 129, 287, 322)
H. 129, 181, 193, 263, 266-268, 271274, 276-278, 280, 288, 299,
31 l, 317, 322, 337, 39 1
Thing, Thinghood: *Ding, *Dinglichkeit
H. 46-49, 54, 63f, 67-69, 73f, 79-83,
9of, 96-100, 114, 121, 124,
203f, et passim
thing, thinghood: Sache, *Sachheit; etc.
(fin. H. 27)
the things themselves: *die Sachen
selbst
H. 9, 27, 34, 38 n. v., 95, 153,
166, 213, 219, 256, 358

573

think: denken; etc.
'1 think': H. 24, 319-321, 427
thinking as Il'4voEiv: H. 96
pure thinking: H. 88
thinking as a derivative from understanding: H. 147
Relations as merely 'something
thought': H. 87f
thinking about death: H. 254, 257f,
261, 309
thinking to the end: H. 305, 424
(See also H. 62, et passim.)
fthe this-worldly: *das Diesseits
H.248
fthç "thither": *das Dorthin
H. 111,368
fthralI to: *horig
H. 163,287
fthreaten, threat: *bedrohen, *drohen
(dj. H. 140, 142, 253, 34 1, 343)
beholding and the threatening: H.
138
fear and the threatening: H. 137,
14°-142, 185f, 341
anxiety and the threatening: H. 186f,
189, 265, 277, 343
uncanniness and the threatening:
H. 189,277
(See also H. 241.)
throw, thrownness: *werfen, *Geworfenheit, *Wurf
(ftn. H. 135, 145) (cif. H. 135,179,
221, 276, 277, 284, 285, 348,
364)
thrownness into existence: H. 276
thrownness into the "there": H. 135,
148, 265, 284, 297, 4 13
thrownness into a world: H. 192,
228, 348, 383, 406, 413
thrownness into uncanniness: H.
343
thrownness into indefiniteness:
H. 298, 308
thrownness into the possibility of
death: H. 251
thrownness into Being-towardsdeath: H. 348
thrownness into death: H. 251, 256,
308,3 2 9
throwness into the "nothing": H. 277n
thrown Being-in-the-world: H. 161,
181, 189, 191f, 259, 38 3
thrown Being-with-one-another: H.
175

Being and Time

574

throw--(;ont.
thrown Being-towards-the-end: H.
25 1
thrown Being-towards-death: H. 344,
348
thrown basis: H. 284, 287, 306, 325
thrown individualization: H. 280,
343
thrown possibility: H. 1441"
thrown potentiality-for-Being: H.
188,339
thrown potentiality-for-Being-in-a
world: H. 192,252
thrownness and facticity: H. 135,
179, 221, 276l 284, 328, 348-,
410, 4 14, 436
thrownness and everydayness: H. 167
thrownness and disclosedness: H. 221,
276,4 15
thrownness and falling: H. 179,415,

42 4

thrownness and turbulence: H. 179
thrownness and abandonment: H.
347, 365, 406, 4 13
thrownnessand mood, state-of-mind,
etc.: H. 135f, 139, 144, 179, 181,
25 1, 270, 276, 328, 340, 365
thrownness and fear: H. 342
thrownness and anxiety: H. 187, 191,
25 1, 343f
thrownness and addiction and urge:
H.196
thrownness and care: H. 383, 406,
4 12
thrownness and projection: H. 145,
138,195,199,223, 285,336,4°6
thrownness and conscience: H. 291
thrownness and Being-towards-death:
H. 344, 348, 374
thrownness and freedom: H. 366
thrownness and having-been: H. 328,
340, 345, 385, 396
thrownness and time-reckoning: H.
4 12f
taking ovel' one's thrownness: H. 38 3,
38 5
coming back behind one's thrownness: H. 284, 383
throwing against: *entgegenwerfen:
H·3 63
tie up: festmachen; klammern (H. 274)
H. 123, 151, 192,414
time: *Zeit; etc.
(fin. H. 329, 408)
H. 329, 408,
4 21 ,423, 43 1-434)

w:

time as the horizon for the understanding or' interpretation of
Being: H. l, 17,39,41,235,437
the ordinary way ofunderstanding or
interpreting time: H. 18, 235,
304, 3 26, 328f, 338n. iii, 404437 (II, VI; esp. Section 81)
the traditional conception of time:
H. 18, 24, 235, 349, 428, 432,
xxx.
the everyday experience of time:
H. 333, 405, 420
primordial and derivative time: H.
329-33 2, 405, 4 26, 436
time and care: H. 235, 327, 424
time and the "they": H. 425
time and idle talk: H. 174
time and reticence: H. 174
time and space: (See entry under
'space')
time and history: H. 379, 404f
time and spirit: H. 405f, 428-436
(Section 82), 427
allowing time: *Zeit lassen: H. 404,
409f,4 14
assigning time: *Zeit angeben, *Zeitangabe: H. 408-410, 413, 418,
42 2
counting time: Zeit zahlen: H. 421f
dating time: H. 408f, 412f, 415, 417,
422
expressing time: *Zeit aussprechen:
H. 408, 411, '421f (Cf. also H.
406f, 410)
giving the time: *Zeit geben: H.
412f, 420, 422,432 n. xxx
having time: *Zeit haben: H. 404,
409f, 4 18f, 422, 425
interpreting time: H. 4°7-414
levelling off time: H. 329,4°5, 422,
4 24-4 26, 43 If, 432 n. xxx, 435
losing time: H. 4°4, 410, 418, 425
measuring time: *Zeitmessung,
*Zeitmass: H. 71, 413-419,
417 n. iv,422
reading off the time: Zeit ablesen
(*tell time, H. 70): H. 415-417
spanning time: (See span.)
taking time, taking one's time:
*sich Zeit nehmen: H. 404f
410-413, 416, 4 18, 421, 4 24f
(See also entry for 'taking tirne into
one's reckoning' helow.)
telling time: (Su reading off the
time.)

Index of English Expressions
time-cont.
using time (*Zeit brauchen): H. 235,
333,4°9
concern with time: H. 406-420
(Sections 79, 80), 422 (Cf. also
H·333·)
time-reckoning: H. 235, 333, 4 11f,
414-418 n. v
reckoning with time: H. 235, 333,
37 1, 404, 4 11 -4 13, 422
taking time into one's reckoning:
H. 371, 404f, 411, 413
'time goes on': H. 330, 425
'time passes away': H. 330, 425f
time as finite, endless, in-finite:
H. 33of, 424-426
time as continuous: H. 423
time as irreversible: H. 426
stream oftime: H. 426, 432
course of time: *Lauf der Zeit (H.
422); *Zeitverlauf (H. 4°°);
*Kreislauf der Zeit (H. 432 n.
xxx); mit der Zeit (H. 328)
point of time: *Zeitpunkt: H. 374,
4°7
earlier time: H. 378, 419
'past' time: H. 380
'fugitive' time: H. 425
'qualitative' time: H. 333
'psychical' time: H. 349
'subjective' or 'Objective' time: H.
326, 405, 4 1l, 4 19, 427
'immanent' or 'transcendent' time:
H. 326, 419
'time for .. .': *"Zeit zu .. .": H.
4 12 ,4 14
'wrong time for .. .': *Unzeit für
.. .': H. 414
at the time: jeweilig, jeweils; etc.
in time: in der Zeit: H. 18f, 204, 330,
338, 338 n. iii, 340f, 349, 355,
367, 373f, 376, 379, 381f,
404f, 4 12, 4 19f, 425, 428, 435
within time, within-time-ness: *innerzeitig, *Innerzeitigkeit
H. 235, 333, 338, 338 n. iii, 349,
3n. 404-437 (II, VI)
timeless: *zeitlos: H. 18, 156, 382
now-time: *Jetzt-Zeit: H. 421, 423,
426
world-time: *Weltzeit:
(dj. H. 414, 419, 420, 422)
H. 405f, 414, 417, 417 n. iv, v;
419-423,426-428,428-436 (Section 82)

575

Aristotle on time: H. 26,4°, 42, 427,
427 n. xiv, 432 n. xxx
Augustine on time: H. 427, 427 n. xv
Bergson on time: H. 18, 26, 333, 432 n.
xxx
Hegel on time: H. 405f, 427, 428-436
(Section 82), H. 432 n. xxx
Hyginus on time: H. 198
Kierkegaard on time: H. 338 n. iii
Plato on time: H. 423
the Being oftime: H. 406, 419, 431
(Note: the word 'tirne' has also heen
used in a few stereotyped phrases to
translate sorne other expressions in
which 'Zeit' does not appear.)
the "to": das auf ...
(fin. H. 329)
to be: *Zu-sein
H·42
tto hand: *zur Hand
H. 73, 102, 105
But cf. ready-to-hand (*zuhanden)
to-day: heute
H. 371, 378, 381, 386, 39 1, 397, 407,
4°9
together: zusammen; *beisammen;
etc.
H. 33, 55f, 159, 204-206, 24 2- 244, 390,
et passim
tomorrow: *morgen, *das Morgige
H·37 1
the "too"; das "Auch"
H.118
tool: Werkzeug (equipment for working, H. 68)
H. 6g, 73f, 157, 354f, 361
totality: *Ganzheit; Ganze (whole);
das' AlI (H. 9, 14, 64); Gesamtheit (H. 28)
But cf. total (*total)
(ftn. H. 236)
totality ofBeing-in-the-world: H. 231
totality of care: H. 193f, 196, 317,
3 24,374
totality of Dasein: H. 234, 237-24°,
241-246 (Section 48), 249, 265,
309f, 3 16, 323, 373. 437
totality of Dasein's Being: H. 182,
230, 232f, 236, 265, 323, 327,
436
totality of Dasein's potentiality-forBeing: H. 266
totality of Dasein's structural whole:
H. 180-184 (Section 39), 191f,
233, 236, 253,3 17, 3 23f

576

Being and Time

ttotality of entities: das AlI des Seienden
H. 9, 14, 64, 24 1, 248
(Note: this list also includes the
passages in which this expression
kas been translated as 'the aggregate of entities'.)
totality of equipment, equipmental
totality: H. 68f, 76, 79-82, 103f,
112, 352-354, 361, 369
totality of historizing: H. 390
totality of involvements: H. 84f, 87,
100, 104, 1lOf, 129, 144, 149f,
15 8, 186, 210, 297, 359, 364
totality of places: H. 102f, I I If
totality ofresoluteness: H. 383
totality of signification: H. 161
totality of temporalizing: H. 406
totality of words: H. 161
constitutive totality: H. 374
equipmental totality: (See totality of
equipment.)
referential totality: *Verweisungsganzheit, *Verweisungsganze
(fin. H. 70)
H. 70, 75f, 82, III, 192,210
relational totality: H. 87, 215f
structural totality: H. 131, 182, 193,
209, 234, 334
tlack oftotality: *Unganzheit
H. 236, 242, 244, 259
totality-structure: H. 246
(Note: for 'Canze', see also H. 11,
75, 168, 216, 232,363,)
touch: *berühren; *rühren; *anrühren
(H.2)
But cf. feel one's way by touch (betasten, H. 91, 97); feel the
touch of (betasten, H. 107) ;
sense of touch (*Tastsinn, 91)
H. 55, 9 1, 93, 97,137,346, etpassim
towards: zu; gegen; entgegen; etc.
das zu ... (*the "towards")
(fin. H. 329)
das Dazu (*the "towards-this")
(fin. H. 78)
H. 74, 84, 86f, 360, 364
das Hin-zu: H. 195
das Wozu (*the "towards-which";
"for-which")
(fin. H. 78, 84, 414)
H. 70, 78, 82-84, 86, 353, 355,
360, 364 (Cf. H. 250.)
das Auf-sich-zu (*the "towardsoneself")
But cf. towards oneself (zu sich

selbst, H. 124); towards itself
(zu ihm selbst, H. 252)
(fin. H. 329)
H. 326, 328, 330
zur Welt (towards the world)
But cf. towards the world as a
whole (weltanschaulich, H. 47)
H.60-62
(See a/sa Being towards.)
gegen: H. 255
(fin. H. 255)
entgegen: H. 243
traditional, tradition: *traditionell,
*Tradition : überliefern; überkomnen
traditional conception oftime: H. 18,
235, 349, 428, 432 n. xxx
traditional conception of truth: H.
214-226 (Sections 44 a, b)
traditional ontology: H. 22, 25-27,
54, 65, 96, 99 f, 147,403
(See also H. 2lf, et passim. Cf. also
our entries for 'come down' and
'hand down'.)
ttranquillity, tranquillize, tranquil:
*beruhigen; Ruhe (H. 254,
430); *ruhig (H. 138,430)
H. 177f, 180, 188f, 195, 253f, 292,
3 1l, 347f, 4 00, 437
ttranscendence, transcendent, transcend: *Transzendenz, *transzendent, *transzendieren; *übersteigen (H. 3, 153)
H. 38, 49, 61, 153, 201f, 326, 335,
350-367 (Section 69, esp. H.
364-366 ), 38 9, 4 19
(Note: see also the entry for 'transcendens, transcendentia' in the Index of
Latin Expressions.)
ttranscendental: *transzendental
H. 3, 1 l, 24, 3 1, 39, 4 1, 96, 199,
208, 215, 319, 319 n. xiv
(Note: see also the entry for 'transcendentalis' in the Index of Latin
Expressions.)
ttransience: *Verganglichkeit
(fin. H. 380)
H. 380
.
ttransition: Übergang, übergehen
But cf. ttransitive (*transitiv, H. 105)
H. 237, 240 , 429, 43 1
ttransmit: *übergeben; *übermitteln
(H. 51); *vermitteln (H. 300)
(fin. H. 21)
H.20f

Index of English Expressions
ttransmute: aufhehen (cancel out,
H. 401, 405; do away with,
H. 332; raise to a new level,
H. 25)
H. 430 (Hegel)
transparent: *durchsichtig
(ftn.H'5) (cff.H. 146• Cf.alsoH.298,
307, et passim)
true, truth: *wahr, *Wahrheit; *getreu (H. 429); etc.
(fin. H. 33, 256) (cff. H. 33, 212225, 256, 397)
Being and truth: H. 183, 213, 227,
23 0,349,357,420
Being oftruth: H. 226-230 (Section
44c)
Being-true: H. 33, 218-220, 226f
Being-in-the-truth, in the truth:
H. 24f. 172, 226f, 229, 256, 264,
2gB, 363 .
Dasein, disclosedness, - and truth:
H. 184, 212-230 (Section 44)
truth of assertion: H. 154, 218, 223,
225,228
truth ofjudgment: H. 33f, 225, 297
truth of the Aclyos: H. 33, 219, 225
truth ofknowledge: H. 46f
truth of pure beholding: H. 171
truth ofvo~î.. : H. 33, 171
truth of sensory perception (ala9'II"S)
H. 33
truth of the present-at-hand: H. 264
truth of Newton's laws: H. 226f
truth of existence: H. 221, 297, 30 7,
397
truth as agreement: H. 33, 214-225
truth as validity: H. 357
truth as uncovering and Deinguncovering: H. 218-220, 225227
truth as uncoveredness and Beinguncovered: H. 219f, 222, 224f.
truth2~6Being-disclosive: H. 256
truth as disclosedness: H. 221, 223,
225, 264f, 297, 397
phenomenological truth: H. 38
primordial truth: H. 33, 214, 21g226 (Section 44b), 297f, 3°7,
3 16
authentic truth: H. 297-299, 302,
3 16
existential truth: H. 316
existentiel1 truth: H. 316
'eternal' truth: H. 227, 229

577

'subjective' truth: H. 227
'universal' truth: H. 227
presupposing truth: H. 226-230
(Section 44C)
maintaining oneself in the truth:
H. 256, 264, 298
holding for true: (See entry for this
expression above.)
truth and certainty: H. 264, 362
'There is truth.': H. 226-228, 316
true propositions, and science: H. II,
357
truth-claims: H. 256
untruth: (See entry for this expression
below.)
pre-ontological conception of truth:
H.225
traditional conéeption of truth:
IL 214-226 (Section 4{a, b)
Greek conception, of truth: H. 33f,
219,222
Heradeitus on truth: H. 219
Parmenides on truth: H. 222
Aristotle on truth: H. 33, 214, 219,
225f
Thomas Aquinas on truth: H. 214Kant on truth: H. 215
Hegel on truth: H. 429, 431
Torck on truth: H. 402f
tturbulence: *Wirbel, *hineinwirbeln
H.178f
turn away: *Abkehr, *abkehren; *abwenden (H. 355,425), etc.
H. 133f, 163, 184-186, 189, 340
turn back: *rückwenden; etc.
H. 136
turn round: *unwenden
H. 136, 2 17
tturn thither: *Hinkehr, *hinkehren
H. 185f, 340
tturn towards: *Ankehr, *ankehren
H. 135
ttypology: *Typologie
H. 178,247,249 n. vi
un- (Important passages in which words
introduad by this prefix occru are
usually listed under the headings
for the words to which the prefix is
attached.)
tuncanny: *unheimlich
(fin. H. 188)
H. 170, 188-190, 192, 252, 276-278,
280, 286f, 289, 295f, 342-344

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time
uncover: entdecken; aufdecken; unverdeckt (H. 23, Kant)
(fin. H. 33, 218)
entdecken:
uncovering of Being: H. 171, 212,
357
uncovering of entities: H. 6, 14, 33,
58, 65, 70-72, 81, 85, 88, 112,
151, 168, 183, 210, 212, 351,
356f, 362f, 366, 389, 413, 420
uncovering of Dasein: H. 105
uncovering of the ready-to-hand:
H. 69, 73, 104, 12 3, 144, 17 2,
333,408
uncovering of the present-at-hand:
H. 73, 158, 333, 356-364 (Section 69b)
uncovering of phenomena: H. 36
uncovering of a fact: H. 336
uncovering of the things themselves:
H·35 8
uncovering of a world: H. 62, 129,
138, 165, 194
uncÇlvering of a 'world': H. 110,
129, 203, 297, 3 12 , 4 12
uncovering of the with-world: H. 129
uncovering ofa number of 'subjects':
H. 12 5
uncovering orthe work-world: H. 172
uncovering of the environment: H.
70f,4 1 3
uncovering of that with which one
concerns oneself: H. 365
uncovering of equipment: H. 69, 79,
81, 352
uncovering of the unusability of
equipment: H. 73
uncovering of the damaging of a
tool: H. 354f
uncovering of the manipulability of
a hammer: H. 34f
uncovering of the south wind: H. 81
uncovering of involvements: H. 85,
87,297,360
uncovering of referential contexts:
H. 7 1, 75
uncovering of Nature: H. 63, 70f,
. 412f, 415, 417 n. iv
uncovering of remoteness: H. 105
uncovering of a "yonder": H. 417
uncovering of space: H. 104, 108,
110-113, 367, 369
uncovering of extensio: H. 95
uncovering of regions: H. 104, 107,
1I1,368f

uncovering of resistance: H. 137,
210
uncovering of possibilities: H. 112,
342
uncovering of time: H. 333
uncovering of a dock: H. 413
uncovering of what is drawing dose:
H.141
uncovering of something threatening: H. 341
circumspective uncovering: H. 73,
104, 106, 108, 123, 148, 172,
220, 228, 312, 333, 35 1, 356,
364

theoretical uncovering: H. 356 (Cf.
also H. 351, 363)
uncovering and meaning: H. 147
uncovering and saying: H. 16g
uncovering and truth: H. 218-228,
256
Being-uncovering: H. 218-220, 224,
228
Being-uncovered: H. 218, 220
(Note: this list also includes the
principal passages in whùh 'entdecken' kas been translated as
'discover'•)
taufdecken: H. 37, 43, 76, 171, 267,
333, 432 n. xxx
(Note: this list also includes the
passages in whùh 'arifdecken' kas
been translated as 'expose'.)
understand, understanding: *verstehen, *Verstiindnis, Verstand
(fin. H. 143, 151) (dj. H. 123,
143f, 172, 263, 288, 295f, 311,
336-338, 350, 387)
H. l, 4, 12, 20-22, 53, 58, 85-87,
12 3- 12 5, 133, 142-153 (Sections
3 1, 3 2), l60f, 170, 173f, 178,
183, 207f, 212, 222, 225, 231,
235, 252, 260, 272, 279, 280289 (Section 58), 295f, 304, 334,
336-339 (Section 68a), 340, 350,
361 -364, 378-382 (Section 73),
421, 437, et passiM
give to understand: (See entry for this
expression above.)
undifferentiated
(See Indifferent.)
unity, unitary, united: *Einheit, *einheitlich
unity ofanalogy: H. 3
unity of Being-in-the-world: H. 53,
35 1

unity-eont.
unity of Being-outside-of-itself: H.
430 (Hegel)
unity of care: H. 181, 316, 327f,
35 1
unity of Dasein's constitution: H. 200
unity ofDasein's existential structure:
H·35 1
unity of Experiences: H. 390
unity of horizontal schemata: H. 365
unity of the "1": H. 433 (Hegel)
unity of living-through: H. 47
(Scheler)
unity of meaning: H. 48 (Scheler)
unity of Nature: H. 144
unity of the person: H. 47f (Scheler)
unity of projection: H. 407
unity of relations: H. 354
unity of significance: H. 365
unity of spatiality: H. 104
unity of the structural whole: H.
3 1 7, 3 2 5
unity of temporality: H. 339f, 365f,
369, 408, 423 (See also ecstatical
unity.)
unity of temporalizing: H. 354, 427
unity of the "there": H. 366
unity of Things of Nature: H. 48
unity of the world: H. 364
ecstatical unity : 328, 338-340, 342,
346, 349f, 353, 355, 363 n.
xxiii, 365, 381, 408, 421, 423
unity of future and having-been:
H. 397
unity of making-present and retentive awaiting: H. 355, 416
unity of the ontical and the Historical: H. 403
unity of the reference of serviceability and the reference of
indicating: H. 78
unity of thrownness and Beingtowards-death: H. 374
unitary phenomena: H. 53, 151, 181,
326
unitary structures: H. 13of, 192
universal-allgemein (general); *universai; etc•
allgemein: H. 2-4, 156, 177, 25 1,
278,280,395,417,434 (Hegel)
*Allgemeingültigkeit:
*universal
validity, *universally valid character
H. 156,205 n. xv, 227, 395
*universal: H. 38f, 178, 395

579

*Allesvergleichen: *universal comparison: H. 52
tunivocal: *einsinnig
H·93
tunmanageable: *unhandlich
But cf. manage (vorstehen; etc.)
H·355
unpresent: (See make unpresent.)
tun-ready-to-hand: *unzuhanden
(fin. H. 74)
H. 73f, 242f, 355, 359
tunsociability: Unumganglichkeit (inevitable, indispensable, etc.)
H. 12 5
unsuitable: ungeeignet (inappropriate)
H. 73,83, 157, 355f, 4 14, 422
(Note: this list includes the chief
passages in which 'ungeeignet' has
been translated as 'inappropriate'.)
the 'until-then'; das "bis dahin"
H·40 9
tuntruth: *Unwahrheit
H. 222f, 229, 256f, 298f, 308
unveil: enthüllen; unverhüllt
the "upon-which": das Woraufhin
H. 145, 15 1, 324f, 365
(Note: this list also includes a few
passages in which 'woraufhin' has
bem translated as 'upon which' or
'whereupon'.)
tuproot: *entwurzeln
H. 21f, 170, 173, 177, 196, 222
turge (noun): *Drang; drangen (H.
345)
But cf. urgent (dringlich).
(fin. H. 182, 194)
H. 10, 194-196
urge (verb): drangen; *bedriingen (H.
196); *eindriingen
use, make use, put to use, usable, etc.:
verwenden; gebrauchen (employ, H. 25); *Gebrauch;
brauchen (need); etc.
(fin. H. 333)
H. 56, 67-7 0 , 74, 83f, 99, 102f,
144,. 235, 333, 35 2f, 357, et
passIm
using and manipulating (Gebrauchen und Hantieren) : H. 67,
69, 102, 35 2, 357, 359
using docks: H. 404, 414-418, 42of
using signs: H. 79, 81f
using time: H. 235, 409

Index of English Expressions

Being and Time
use--cont.
using up: *verbrauchen, *aufbrauchen: H. 244f, 333
unusable: *unverwendbar, *unbrauchbar: H. 73f, 355
Thingofuse: *Gebrauchsding: H. 99
futilitarianism: *Nützlichkeitsmoral
H.293
utilize: verwenden (H. 333); nutzen
(H. 61); ausnützen (H. 411);
etc.
(fin· H. 333)
utter (verb), utterance: Verlautbarung
H. 32f, 163-165, 27 1-273, 277, 296
utter (adj.) : vôllig: schlechthin; schlechthinnig
futtermost: ausserst
H. 250, 255, 259, 262-264, 266, 302f,
326
valid, validity: gelten, Geltung; gültig, Gültigkeit
(fin. H. 155)
H. 7, 99, 127, 155f, 227, 357, 395
value: Wert; etc.
H. 63, 69, 80, 99f, 150, 152, 227,
286,293f
veil: verhüllen; einhüllen; verschleiem (H. 136)
fvelocity: Geschwindigkeit (speed,
H·105)
H. 9 1, 97
fvicissitude: Geschick
(fin. H. 384)
H. 16, 19, 379)
fviolent: gewaltsam (drastic, H. 219)
H. 183, 287, 3I1, 3 13, 3 15, 327
fvirtuality: *Virtualitii.t
H·401
vision: (Su c1ear vision, moment of
vision.)
fvitalism: *Vitalismus (H. 10)
But cf. vital (lebendig, H. 400, 402).
fvolition: Wollen
H. 136, 139
voice: *Stimme
alien voice: H. 277
mysterioua voice: H. 274
voice of conscience: H. 268f, 271,
275, 280, 2go-292, 294> 300
voice of the friend: H. 163
voice of the "they": H. 278
voice which is univenally binding:
H. 278

fvolatilize: *verflüchtigen
H. 87f, 117, 177, 420
fvoluntative: *voluntativ
H. 210, 210 n. xix
wait: warren; etc.
(fin. H. 25, 26, 338)
H. 262, 337f, et passim
want: wollen
waoting to have a conscience: (See
entry under 'eonscima' abOVl.)
fwam: *wamen
But cf. waming signal (H. 78,80).
H. 161, 279, 281, 290, 292, 294
way of conceiving: BergrifHichkeit
the 'we': das "wir"
H.227f
fthe we-world: *das Wir-welt
H.65
weak, weakness: *schwach, *Schwache
But cf. weaken (*abschwachen).
H. 251, 254
fwelfare work: Fürsorge
(ftn. H. 121)
H.121
the "what": das Was
H. 12, 27,42,45, 122, 143, 158, 274
the "when": das Wann
H. 258, 265
fthe 'then, when . • .': *das "daon,
wann ••.": H. 407, 410, 412,

41 4

fthe "whence": *das Woher
H. 134-136,280,348
the "where": das Wo
H. 102f, 107
fthe "whereat": das Wobei
H. 107
the "wherein": das Worin
H. 30, 65, 76,80, 86f, 110, 151, 19B,
202

(Note: this list also intluJu sorne
passages in whieh 'das Worin' or
'warin' kas bun translated sornewhat morefruly.)
the "whereof": das Woraus
H·7°
(Note: cf. also H. 19B.)
fthe "whereupon": das Woraufhin
H·365
(Note: cf. our entry for 'the "upon-

whieh" '.)

the "whither": das Wohin
H. 1°3, 108, 110f, 134-136, 280, 36S.
368

the "who": das Wer
H. 45, 53, 113, 114-117 (Section 25),
126, 128-131, 267, 276, 31 l,
3 17,375
whole: ganz, Ganze; etc.
(fin. H. 236)
the whole of Dasein: H. 181, 191f,
200, 230, 232f, 237-241 (Section 47), 259, 264, 306, 3 17,
329, 372f, 436
the whole of Being-in-the-world:
H. 41, 137, 152, 180
the whole of care: H. 22 l, 300
the whole of life: H. 46
the whole of discourse: H. 163
the whole of places: H. 48
the moon as a whole: H. 243
whole and sum: H. 244 n. iii
Being-a-whole: *Ganzsein
H. 234, 235-267 (II, 1 esp. Section
46), 301-305 (Section 61), 317,
3 25, 33 1, 372f
potentiality-for-Being-a-whole: (See
entry under 'potentiality-for-Being'.)
structural whole: (See entry under
'structure'.)
(Note: see also totality.)
'wholeness: *Ganze
(fin. H. 236)
H. 236-238, 240
he "why": das Warum
H.276
twill (noun): *Wille
(ftn. H. 182)
H. 136, 182, 2og-211, 271, 275
will (verb): wollen
(ftn. H. 194)
H. 194f, 210, 290-293
wish: *Wunsch, *wünschen
(fin. H. 182, 194)
H. 162, 182, 194f
the 'with': das "Mit" (H. 118)
(fin. H. 84)
the "with-which": das Womit
H. 85-88 (Cf. also H. 158, 352f).
with one another: miteinander (mutual, H. 155)
H. 120-127, 129f, 138, 142, 161f,
164f, 168, 173-175, 177, 238240, 252f, 273, 282, 298 , 354,
370, 379, 384, 38 7f, 4 1Of, 4 13,
416,42 5
.
fBeing without one another: *Ohneeinandersein
H.121

fwith-world: *Mitwelt
H. 118, 125, 129, 300
within: innerhalb (in; among, H. 21 1) ;
inner-; das "Innere" (H. 136)
fwithin-the-environment:
*innerumweltlich: H. 66, 85
fwithin-space: *innerraumlich: H.
102
fwithin-time: (See entry undn 'time'.)
within-the-world: *innerweItlich
(But cf. within the world (*innerhalh der WeIt); in the world
(*in der WeIt)
(fin. H. 13) (tif. H. 65, lOI, 118,
209,366 )
H. 65, 72-76 (Section 16), 8o, 8288,95-98, loof, 102-104 (Section
22), 113, 118, 186f, 189, 201,
2°3, 209, 21 l, 351, 366, et passim
word: Wort; etc.
H. 87, 159, 161, 164, 202, 273, 402
(Torek)
work (noun): *Werk; Arbeit
But cf. weIfare work (Fürsorge,
H.121).
(ftn. H. 70)
*Werk: H. 69f, 352-354, 387-389,
395,4 12
work (verh): -arbeiten; -wirken; etc.
work out: ausarbeiten (treat); *herausarbeiten; *durcharbeiten (H.
93; auswirken (development,
H·9 6)
H. 148, 231, et passim
work-world, world ofwork: *WerkweIt
H. 7 1, 117, 172,352
world: *Welt
(fin. H. 63) (tif. H. 64f, 72 , 75,
364f, 380, 4 14)
abandonment to the world: H. 172,
4 12
absorption in the world: H. 125,
129f, 172, 192
Being alongside the world: H. 54,
119, 146, 194, 277
Being-already-alongside-the-world:
H. 61, 1°9, 277
Being-in-the-world: (See special entry
ahove.)
Being-no-Ionger-in-the-world: H.
176, 238, 240
Being towards the world: (See entry
under 'Being towards' ahove.)
Being-with-one-another-in-theworld: H. 238f, 384

Being and Time
world-cont.
belonging to the world, H. 65, 381
concern with the world: H. 61, 199,
253, 277, et passim
discovering the world: H. 55, 129,
138 , 165, 195, 203
disclosedness of the world: H. 76,
137, 139, 141, 145f, 186-188,
202f, 21Of, 220, 272, 297, 333,
364f, 368, 4 12 , 4 19 f
familiarity with the world: H. 76, 86
fascination with the world: H. 61
fleeing the world: H. 254
getting 'lived' by the world: H. 195f
going-out-of-the-world: H. 238, 240
having-been-in-the-world: H. 394
information about the world: H. 152
interpreting the world: H. 129
knowing the world: (See entry for
'know the world' aboue.)
letting the world 'matter' to one:
H.17°
openness to the world: H. 137
presupposing the world: H. 361, 365
relations to the world: H. 57
submitting to the world: H. 137f, 139
surrendered to the world: H. 199
thrown into the world: H. 192, 199,
221, 228, 348, 413
understanding the world: H. 16,86,
146, 148, 152, 168, 366
ambiguity and the world: H. 173
anxiety and the world: H. 186-188,
335,343
Dasein-with and the world: H. 12112 3, 137
environment and the world: H. 66,
101-1 13 (l, III C)
fear and the world: H. 141
the present-at-hand and the world:
H. 57, 130, 369
Reality and the world: H. 106, 203,
211
the ready-to-hand and the world:
H. 75f, 83, 106, 119, 122, 137
resoluteness and the world: H. 298f
significance and the world: H. 11l,
l44f, 147, 151, 166, 186, 297,
335, 343, 366, 4 23
spatiality and the world: H. 101-113
(l, III C), 369
Being-there of the world: H. 132
historizing of the world: H. 389
'natural conception of the world':
H. 50-52 (Section Il)

the "nothing" of the world: H. 187,
189, 276, 335, 343
ontology of the world: H. 100
'subjectivity' of the world: H. 36
transcendence of the world: H.
350-366 (Section 69, esp. 69c),
4 19
worldhood of the world: (See entry
for 'worldhood' below.)
alien world: H. 172
external world: (See entry aboue.)
historical world: H. 376, 381, 388f
past world: H. 380
primitive world: H. 82
projected world: H. 394
public world: H. 71
tspiritual world: H. 47 n. ii
twe-world: H. 65
twish-world: H. 195
with-world: (See entry aboue.)
twork-world, world of work: (See
entry aboue.)
world of equipment: equipment
world: H. 354, 359, 4 13
tworld ofplants and animaIs: H. 246
world that has been: H. 381
world that has-been-there: H. 393f
world that is no longer: H. 380
world-character: H. 414
tworld-conscience: H. 278
tworld-history, world-historical:
*Weltgeschichte, *wehgeschichtlich
H. 19f, 332, 3n. 387-397 (Sections 75, 76), 428 n. xvii (Hegel),
434 (Hegel)
tworld-point: H. 362
tworld-space: H. 54, 104
world-structure: H. 366, 414
tworld-stuff: *We1tstoff
H. 71,85
world-time: (See entry under 'time'
above.)
tworld-view: *Weltanschauung,
weltanschaulich
H. 180, 200, 301 n. xv (Jaspers),
392,396
(Note: cf. also H. 47.)
The world is not an entity withinthe-world: H. 72, 118
Dasein is its world: H. 364
The world is 'there': H. 144
The world frees entities: H. 123, 129
How death 'came into the world':
H.248

Index of English Expressions
world-cont.
Descartes on the world: H. 89"9°;
(l, III)
Husserl on the world: H. 47 n. ii
Kant on the world: H. 108, 321
'world': *"Welt"
(fin. H. 63) (dj. H. 63-65, Sg, 202)
abandoning (verlassen) the 'world':
H.238
abandonment (überlassen) to the
'world': H. 356, 406, 412f
absorption in the 'world': H. 184,
189
addressing oneself to the 'world'
etc.: H. 59
Being-alongside the 'world': H. 175,
181, 189, 311, 352
conceming oneself with the 'world':
H. 136, 143, 175, 184f, 25 2, 270,
277, 3 11 , 338, 4 11
de-severing the 'world': H. 105
devotion to the 'world': H. 136
discovering the 'world': H. 110, 129,
203, 277, 3 12
falling into the 'world': H. 175, 185,
ISg,338
fascination with the 'world': H. 176
having the 'world': H. 58
knowing the 'world': H. 138
letting the 'world' 'Inatter' to one:
H.139
losing oneself in the 'world': H. 221,
348
presupposing the 'world': H. 64
relationship to the 'world': H. 57
5eeing the 'world': H. 138
spatializing the 'world': H. 112
submittedness to the 'world': H. 161,
277,383
surrendering to the 'world': H. 139
theoretical attitude towards the
'world': H. 356
understanding the 'world': H. 148,
201

583

understanding oneself in tenns of the
'world': H. 15, 22, 221, 411
anxiety and the 'world': H. 187, 189
fear and the 'world': H. ISg
Nature and the 'world': H. 25
Reality and the 'world': H. 183,2°7
the Being-present-at-hand of the
'world': H. 132, 192
alien 'world': H. 356
the 'world' as it looks: H. 172
Descartes on the 'world': H. 99-101
(l, III C)
worldhood: *Weltlichkeit
But cf.: deprive of its worldhood
(*entweltlichen)
(fin. H. 63) W: H. 86, 87, 88, 123)
H. 41, 63-113 (l, III), 123, 137f,
145, 183f, 187, 192, 200-212
(Section 43), 334f, 4 14, 4 16, 4 24
twordless: *weltlos
H. 55, 110f, 188, 192,206,211,316,
366,388
worldly: weltlich (after the manner of
the world, H. 273, 278)
But cf.: worldly character (*Weltmâssigkeit); this-worldly (*Diesseits); other-worldly (*Jenseits).
(fin. H. 63) (dj. H. 65)
H. 65, 119, 161, 166, 274, 276, 30 7,
344
. k .
worldly character: *Weltmâsslg elt
But cf.: world-character (*Weltcharakter, H. 4(4)
(fin. H. 63)
H. 72-76 (Section (6), 79f, 85, 95,
112, 209 n. xvii
tworry: *Besorgnis
H. 192, 197
yesterday: gestern
H·37 1
the "yonder": *das Dort
H. 102, 107f, 119f, 132, 186, 369,
4 16f

Index of Latin Expressions

INDEX OF LATIN EXPRESSIONS
a potiori fit denominatio: H. 329
a priori: H. 4, Il,41,441', 50 n. x, 53,
58, 65, 85, 101, 11of, 115, 131,
149f, 152, 165, 183, 193, 199, 206,
229,3 21 ,362
adaequatio intellectus et rei: H. 214, 216f
(fin. H. 214)
anima: H. 14
animal rationale: H. 48, 165
honum: H. 286, 345
capax mutationum: H. 91, 96
circulus vitiosus: H. 152
cogitare, cogitationes: H. 46, 49, 211, 433
(Note: see also 'res cogitans' and 'ego
cogito'.)
cogito me cogitare rem: H. ,433
cogito sum: H. 24, 40, 46, 89, 211
colo: H. 54
color: H. 91
commercium: H. 62, 132, l,u
communis opinio: H. 403 (Torck)
compositum: H. 244 n. iii
(Note: cf. also H. 191, 198: 'Kompositum'.)
concupiscentia: H. 171
conscientia: H. 433
convenientia: H. 132, 214f
contritio: H. 190 n. iv
co"espondentia: H. 214
cura: H. 183, 197-199, 197 n. v
definitio: H. 4
diligio: H. 54
durities: H. 91
ego: H. 43, 46, 211
ego cogito: H. 22, 89
ens: H. 24
ens creatum: H. 24, 92
ens finitum: H. 49
ens increatum: H. 24
ens infinitum: H. 24
ens perfectissimum: H. 92
ens quod natum est convenire cum omni
enti: H. 14
ens realissimum: H. 128
modus specialis entis: H. 14

essentia: H. 42f
existentia: H. 42f
(fin. H. 25)
existit, ad existendum: H. 95
exitus: H. 241
extensio: H. 89-9 1, 93"95, 97, 99- 101
factum hrutum: H. 135
fundamentum inconcussum: H. 24
futurum:
bonumfuturum: H. 345
malumfuturum: H. 141, 341, 345
meditatio futurae vitae: H. 249 n. vi
hahitare: H. 54
hahitus: H. 300
homo: H. 198
humus: H. 198
intellectio: H. 95f
intellectus: H. 214, 216, 225
intuitus: H. 358
lihertas indifferentiae: H. 144
lumen naturale: H. 133, 170
malum: H. 14 1, 286,341, 345
meditatio futurae vitae: H. 249 n. v
modus: H. 14, 9of
motus: H. 91
nunc stans: H. 427 n. xiii
perfectio: H. 199
poenitentia: H. 190 n. iv
pondus: H. 91
praesuppositum: H. 101
privatio: H. 286
privativum: H. 284
propensio in ••• : H. 188
proprietas: H. 93, 100
ratio: H. 34, 94
(fin. H. 34)
realiter: H. 94
remanens capax mutationum: H. 96

res: H. 67, 201, 209, 214, 216, 225
res cogitans: H. 98, 112f, 207, 211,
319f, 320 n. xix
res corporea: H. 89, 9of, 94, 101
res IXtensa: H. 66,89-92 (Section 19),
97f, 112
sensatio: H. 96
sollicitudo: H. 199 n. vii
solus ipse: H. 188
stare
(fin. H. 303)
status corruptionis: H. 180, 306 n. ii
status gratiae: H. 180
status intergritatis: H. 180
subjectum: H. 46, 114
(Note: cf. H. 319, 322: 'suhjektum'.)

suhstantia: H. 89f, 92, 94
sum: H. 24, 211
(Note: cf. entry for 'cogito sum'.)
totum: H. 244 n. iii
timor castus et servilis: H. 190 n. iv
transcendens, transcendentia: H. 3, 14, 38
transcendentalis: H. 38
univoce: H. 93
veritas: H. 38
verum: H. 14
via negationis et eminentiae: H. 427 n. xiii
vitiosus: H. 152f

Index of Greek Expressions
</10.-: H. 28
t/>o.lVCAl, </Io.lVEa8o." </I,.,v0J1oEvov: H. 28f,

3 2, 21 9

INDEX OF GREEK EXPRESSIONS
aya.80v: H. 29
ayvoEtv: H. 33
a.fa8"1a,s: H. 14, 33, 96, 226
aKo"'ov8EtV: H. 432 n. xxx
a"'''18ls, a"'~8E'a., a"'''18nlnv:

(fin. H. 33)
H. 33, 219f, 222, 223 n. xxxix
Ilv8pw7ros: H. 48
a7ro: H. 32
a7ro</la.lVEa8a." a7ro</la.va,s: H. 32-34,
154,218f
IIp,8J1ooS Kw~aEws: H. 432 n. xxx
apx~: H. 212

Mynv: H. 25 f , 34, 43

(fin. H. 34)

"'oyos: H. 25, 3 2-34, 37, 44, 48, 59,
154, 158-160, 165, 219f, 222f, 225 f
(ftn. H. 34> 44)
"'V7r"1: H. 342
J1ol8E€'S: H. 216
J1olp'J1ovo.: H. 194 n. vii
J1o.q 8v: H. 138
J1ov8os: H. 6
VO"1J1oo., VO"1a's: H. 14, 25 f , 33,
43,59,96, 17 1, 21 4,226
(ftn. H. 44, 171)
vvv: H. 432 n. xxx

VOEtV,

ylvos: H. 3
y,ya.VT0J1oa.Xla. 7rEpl TijS ovala.s: H. 2
Il''1'''ovv: H. 32
Il,a.ywy~: H. 138

Il,o.lpEa,s: H. 159
Il,o.voEtv: H. 96, 226
llo€a.: H. 223 n. xxxix

Ellllvo.,: H. 171
(fin. H. 171)
Elllos: H. 61, 319
Elvo.,: H. 171
lKaTo.a's, lKaTo.T'KOV: H. 329
(fin. H. 329)
l7r,Ào.v8w,0J1oo.,: H. 219
.rPJ1o"1VEJnv , .rPJ1o"1vElo.: H. 37, 158
EVX~: H. 32

fll,o.: H. 33
Ko.80Àov: H. 3
Ka.T"1yopEta8o." Ka.T"1yopla.: H. 44f
Kplvnv Àoy'l': H. 222f

8"'ov: H. 244 n. iii
dJ1oolwJ1oo.: H. 214
(fin. H. 214)
8v, 8VTo.: H. l, 3, 14, 138
(fin. H. 1)
dplyoJ1oo.,: H. 171

(ftn. H. 171)
8pos: H. 432 n. xxx
ovalll: H. 2, 25f, 90

(fin. H. 25)
7ra8'1J1oo., 7ra8os: H. 138, 214
7rtÎv: H. 244 n. iii

7ro.povalo.: H. 25

(fin. H. 25)
7rpâyJ1oo.: H. 68, 214, 219
7rpâ€,s: H. 68

aT''l'J1o~: H. 432 n. xxx

avv-: H. 33
avv8Ea,s: H. 33f, 159
avvCAlvvJ1oCAls: H. 93
a</lo.tpo.: H. 432 n. xxx
To.po.X~: H. 342

Ào.8-

(fin. H. 33)
"'o.v8avw: H. 219

TOllE T': H. 432 n. xxx

t/>o.vTo.alo.: H. 33
t/>pa'wv 87rCAls lxn: H. 219
t/>tIIV': H. 33

</Iws: H. 28
xpovos: H. 432 n. xxx
ifJEvllEa8o.,: H. 33
r{1vx~: H. 14, 214

Index of Proper Names
Israeli, Isaac: H. 214

INDEX OF PROPER NAMES
Ackermann aus Bohmm, Der: H. 245 n. iv
Aristotle: H. 2, 3, 10, 14, 18, 25, 26,
32, 33, 39, 40, 93, 138-4°, 159,
17 1, 199, 208, 212-4, 219, 225,
226, 244 n. iii, 34 1, 342, 399, 4°2,
42 1,427,428,43 2,433
De Anima: H. 14 and n. vi.
De InterpretatÙJrl4: H. 32 n. iv, 214
and n. xxix
EthicaNicomachea: H. 32 n. iv, 225 n.
xlii
Metaphysica: H. 3, 32 n. iv, 39,138 n.
iv, 171,212,213,225 n. xlii
Physica: H. 421 n. vii, 427, 428,
432 n. xxx
RJutrJrica: H. 138, 140 n. vi, 342 n. vi
Augustine of Hippo, Saint: H. 43, 44,
139, 171, 190 n. iv, 199 n. vii, 427
ConfessÙJrl4s: H. 43, 44> 17 1, 427
Contra Faustum: H. 139 n. v
De diversis quaestionibus octoginta tribus: 190 n. iv
Avicenna: H. 214
Baer, K. von: H. 58
Becker, O.: H. JJ2 n. xxii
Bergson, Henri: H. 18, 26, 47, 333,
432 n. xxx
Bernt, A.: H. 245 n. iv
Bilfinger, G.: H. 418 n. v
Bolzano, Bernhard: H. 218 n. xxxiv
Brentano, Franz: H. 215
Bücheler, F.: H. 197 n. v
Burdach, K.: H. 197 n. v, 199, 245 n.
iv
Cajetan, Thomas de Vio: H. 93 n. xiv
Calvin,John: H. 49, 249 n. vi
Cassirer, Ernst,: H. 51 n. xi
Descartes, René: H. 22, 24, 25, 40,
45,46,66,89-101,2°3,2°4,205 n.
xv, 21 l, 320 n. xix, 433
Meditations: H. 24, 98
Principia Philosophiae: H. 90-4, 96,
97
Diels, H.: H. 212 n. xx, 219 n. xxxv,
418 n. v
Dilthey, Wilhelm: H. 46, 47 and n. ii,

205 n. xv, 209, 210 and n. xix,
249 n. vi, 377, 385 n. viii, 397-404
Duns Scotus, Johannes: H. 3

Earth (Tellus): H. 198
Faust: H. 4°1

Genesis: H. 48
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von: H.
197 n. v, 401
GottI, F.: H. 388 n. ix
Grimm,Jakob: H. 54 n. i

Hartmann, Nicolai: H. 208 n. xvi,
433 n. xxx
Hegel, G. W. F.: H. 2, 3, 22,171,235 n.
vi, 272 n. vi, 320 n. xix, 405, 406,
427 and n. xvi, 428-36
Die Vernunft in der Geschichte: H. 428,
434
Encyklopadie: H. 429, 432 n. xxx
Jena Logik: H. 432 n. xxx
Phii.nommologu des Geistes: H. 434
Wissenschaft der Logik: H. 431 n. xxv,
433
Heidegger, Martin: H. 38 n. v, 51 n.
xi, 72 n. i, 199 n. vii, 268 n. iii,
319 n. xvi, 418 n. v
Heimsoeth, H.: H. 320 n. xix
Heracleitus: H. 219
Herbig, G.: H. 349 n. xii
Herder, Johann Gottfried von: H.
197 n. v, 198 n. vi
Hermann, Karl Friedrich: H. 400
Homer: H. 400
Humboldt, W. von: H. JJ9, 166
Husserl, Edmund: H. 38 and n. v, 47
and n. ii, 50 n. x, 41 n. xi, 77 n. ii,
166 n. x, 218 n. xxxiv, 244 n. iii,
363 n. xxiii
Idem: H. 47, 77 n. ii
Logische Untersuchungen: H. 38, 77 n.
ii, 166 n. x, 218 n. xxxiv, 244 n.
iii, 363 n. xxiii
'Philosophie als strenge Wissenschaft': H. 47
Hyginus: H. 197 n. v

Jacob: H. 401
Jaspers, Karl: H. 249 n. vi, 301 n.
vi, 338 n. iii
Jupiter: H. 198
Kahler, Martin: H. 272 n. vi
Kant, Immanuel: H. 4, 23, 24, 26, 30,
31,4°, 51 n. xi, 94, 101, 109, 110,
203-6, 208, 210, 215, 229, 271,
272 n. vi, 293, 318 and n. xv,
319 and n. xvi, 320 and n. xix,
3 21 , 358, 367, 419, 427 and n.
xvi, 432 n. xxx
Kritik der reinen Vernunft: H. 23, 30,
3 1, 51 n. xi, 94, 203-5, 3 18, 319,
358
'Was heisst: sich im Denken orientieren ?': H. 109
Kierkegaard, S,éren: H. 190 n. iv,
235 n. vi, 338 n. iii
Korschelt, E.: H. 246 n. v
Lask, E.: H. 218 n. xxxiv
Lotze, Rudolf Hermann: H. 99, 155
Luther, Martin: H. 10, 190 n. iv
Misch, G.: H. 399 n. xiv
New Testament: H. 199 n. vii, 400
Newton, Isaac: H. 226, 227
Nietzsche, Friedrich: H. 264, 272 n.
vi,396
Parmenides: H. 14, 25, 26, 100, 171,
212, 213, 222, 223 n. xxxix
Pascal, Blaise: H. 139
Paul, Saint: H. 249 n. vi
Petavius, Dionysius: H. 418 n. v

Plato: H. l, 2, 3, 6, 25, 32, 39,
244 n. iii, 399, 4°2, 423
Parmmides: H. 39
Sophistes: H. l, 6
Timaeus: H. 423
Ranke, Leopold von: H. 400
Reinhardt, Karl: H. 223 n. xxxix
Rickert, Heinrich: H. 375
Ritschl, Albrecht: H. 272 n. vi
Rühl, F.: H. 419 n. v
Saturn: H. 198
Scaliger, Josephus Justus: H. 418 n. v
Scheler, Max: H. 47, 48, 139, 208 n.
xvi, 210 and n. xix, 272 n. vi,
291 n. viii, 320 n. xix
Schopenhauer, Arthur: H. 272 n. vi
Seneca: H. 199
Simmel, Georg: H. 249 n. vi, 375,
418 n. v
Spranger, Eduard: H. 394 n. xi
Stoics: H. 199 n. viii
Stoker, H. G.: H. 272 n. vi
Suarez, Franciscus: H. 22
Thomas Aquinas, Saint: H. 3, 14 and
n. vii, 214 and n. xxx
Thucydides: H. 39
Tolstoy, Leo: H. 254 n. xii
Unger, Rudolf: H. 249 n. vi
Wackernagel, Jakob: H. 349 n. xii
Windelband, Wilhelm: H. 399
Wolff, Christian: H. 28
Yorck von Wartenburg, Paul Graf:
H. 377. 397-404
Zwingli, Huldreich: H. 49

